A.1B. Explain the Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct, which are ethical and professional ideals for CFP® professionals. CFP® professionals must follow in order to adhere to these principles.Code of EthicsA CFP® professional must: 1. Act with honesty, integrity, competence, and diligence. 2. Act in the client’s best interests. 3. Exercise due care.4. Avoid or disclose and manage conflicts of interest. 5. Maintain the confidentiality and protect the privacy of client information. 6. Act in a manner that reflects positively on the financial planning profession and CFP® certification.Standards of ConductAre organized into six main areas:1. Duties to Clients2. The Financial Planning Process and application of standards for financial planning process3. Practice standards for the financial planning process4. Duties to Firms and Subordinates5. Duties to CFP Board6. Prohibition on circumventionSummary:Here is a brief overview of each category:1. Duties to Clients: This category covers the duties that CFP professionals have to their clients, including the duty to act in the client's best interests, provide professional services with integrity and diligence, and avoid conflicts of interest.2. The Financial Planning Process and Application of the Standards for Financial Planning: This category covers the steps that CFP professionals must follow when providing financial planning services to clients, as well as the application of the Standards of Conduct to the financial planning process.3. Practice Standards for the Financial Planning Process: This category covers the specific practice standards that CFP professionals must follow when providing financial planning services to clients, including the duty to gather client data, analyze the client's financial status, develop and present recommendations, implement the recommendations, and monitor the plan.4. Duties to Firms and Subordinates: This category covers the duties that CFP professionals have to their firms and subordinates, including the duty to comply with company policies and procedures, act in the best interests of the firm, and maintain confidentiality.5. Duties to the CFP Board: This category covers the duties that CFP professionals have to the CFP Board, including the duty to cooperate with investigations, maintain the integrity of the certification, and report violations of the Standards of Conduct.6. Prohibition on Circumvention: This category covers the prohibition on circumventing the Standards of Conduct, which includes the duty to avoid engaging in any conduct that would undermine the integrity of the certification or the Standards of Conduct.Duties to ClientsThe fiduciary duty is a fundamental obligation that CFP professionals have to their clients, requiring them to act in the client's best interests, putting the client's interests ahead of their own. Here is a more in-depth overview of the fiduciary duty subcategory under the Duties to Clients:1. Fiduciary Duty: This subcategory requires CFP professionals to act in the best interests of their clients, putting their clients' interests ahead of their own. This duty requires CFP professionals to provide objective and unbiased advice that is tailored to the client's specific needs and goals.2. Integrity: This subcategory requires CFP professionals to act with honesty, trustworthiness, and fairness in all their dealings with clients. CFP professionals must maintain a high level of integrity in order to build and maintain trust with their clients.a. A CFP® professional must perform Professional Services with integrity. Integrity demands honesty and candor, which may not be subordinated to personal gain or advantage. Allowance may be made for innocent error and legitimate differences of opinion, but integrity cannot co-exist with deceit or subordination of principle.b. A CFP® professional may not, directly or indirectly, in the conduct of Professional Services:i. Employ any device, scheme, or artifice to defraud;ii. Make any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading; oriii. Engage in any act, practice, or course of business which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit upon any person.Competence A CFP® professional must provide Professional Services with competence, which means with relevant knowledge and skill to apply that knowledge. When the CFP® professional is not sufficiently competent in a particular area to provide the Professional Services required under the Engagement, the CFP® professional must gain competence, obtain the assistance of a competent professional, limit or terminate the Engagement, and/or refer the Client to a competent professional. The CFP® professional shall describe to the Client any requested Professional Services that the CFP® professional will not be providing.more recently, the following is important guideline in terms of advising or choosing not to advise clients on cryptocurrency:* CFP professionals must only provide financial planning services in areas where they have the necessary knowledge, skills, and expertise.* CFP professionals must disclose any limitations in their knowledge, skills, or expertise to clients, and must not engage in any activities or services that are beyond their professional competence.Diligence: This subcategory requires CFP professionals to act with reasonable care and promptness in providing financial planning services to clients. CFP professionals must exercise due care and attention to ensure that they provide high-quality financial planning services to their clients.Disclose and Manage Conflicts of Interesta. Disclose Conflicts. When providing FinancialAdvice, a CFP® professional must make full disclosure of all Material Conflicts of Interest with the CFP® professional’s Client that could affect the professional relationship. This obligation requires the CFP® professional to provide the Client with sufficiently specific facts so that a reasonable Client would be able to understand the CFP® professional’s Material Conflicts of Interest and the business practices that give rise to the conflicts, and give informed consent to such conflicts or reject them. A sincere belief by a CFP® professional with a Material Conflict of Interest that he or she is acting in the best interests of the Client is insufficient to excuse failure to make full disclosure.i. A CFP® professional must make full disclosure and obtain the consent of the Client before providing any Financial Advice regarding which the CFP® professional has a Material Conflict of Interest.ii. In determining whether the disclosure about a Material Conflict of Interest provided to the Client was sufficient to infer that a Client has consented to a Material Conflict of Interest, CFP Board will evaluate whether a reasonable Client receiving the disclosure would have understood the conflict and how it could affect the advice the Client will receive from the CFP® professional. The greater the potential harm the conflict presents to the Client, and the more significantly a business practice that gives rise to the conflict departs from commonly accepted practices among CFP® professionals, the less likely it is that CFP Board will infer informed consent absent clear evidence of informed consent. Ambiguity in the disclosure provided to the Client will be interpreted in favor of the Client.iii. Evidence of oral disclosure of a conflict will be given such weight as CFP Board in its judgment deems appropriate. Written consent to a conflict is not required.b. Manage Conflicts. A CFP® professional must adopt and follow business practices reasonably designed to prevent Material Conflicts of Interest from compromising the CFP® professional’s ability to act in the Client’s best interests.Sound and Objective professional judgementA CFP® professional must exercise professional judgment on behalf of the Client that is not subordinated to the interest of the CFP® professional or others. A CFP® professional may not solicit or accept any gift, gratuity, entertainment, non-cash compensation, or other consideration that reasonably could be expected to compromise the CFP® professional’s objectivity.ProfessionalismA CFP® professional must treat Clients, prospective Clients, fellow professionals, and others with dignity, courtesy, and respect.Comply with the Lawa. A CFP® professional must comply with the laws, rules, and regulations governing Professional Services.b. A CFP® professional may not intentionally or recklessly participate or assist in another person’s violation of these Standards or the laws, rules, or regulations governing Professional Services.Confidentiality and Privacy a. A CFP® professional must keep confidential and may not disclose any non-public personal information about any prospective, current, or former Client (“client”), except that the CFP® professional may disclose information:i. For ordinary business purposes:1. With the client’s consent, so long as the client has not withdrawn the consent;2. To a CFP® Professional’s Firm or other persons with whom the CFP® professional is providing services to or for the client, when necessary to perform those services;3. As necessary to provide information to the CFP® professional’s attorneys, accountants, and auditors; and4. To a person acting in a representative capacity on behalf of the client;ii. For legal and enforcement purposes:1. To law enforcement authorities concerning suspected unlawful activities, to the extent permitted by the law;2. As required to comply with federal, state, or local law;3. As required to comply with a properly authorized civil, criminal, or regulatory investigation or examination, or subpoena or summons, by a governmental authority;4. As necessary to defend against allegations of wrongdoing made by a governmental authority;5. As necessary to present a civil claim against, or defend against a civil claim raised by, a client;6. As required to comply with a request from CFP Board concerning an investigation or adjudication; and7. As necessary to provide information to professional organizations that are assessing the CFP® professional’s compliance with professional standards.b. A CFP® professional may not use any non-public personal information about a client for his or her direct or indirect personal benefit, whether or not it causes detriment to the client, unless the client consents.c. A CFP® professional, either directly or through the CFP® Professional’s Firm, must take reasonable steps to protect the security of non-public personal information about any client, including the security of information stored physically or electronically, from unauthorized access that could result in harm or inconvenience to the client.d. A CFP® professional, either directly or through the CFP® Professional’s Firm, must adopt and implement policies regarding the protection, handling, and sharing of a client’s non-public personal information and must provide a client with written notice of those policies at the time of the Engagement and thereafter not less than annually (at least once in any 12-month period) unless (i) the CFP® professional’s policies have not changed since the last notice sent to a client; and (ii) the CFP® professional does not disclose non-public personal information other than as permitted without a client’s consent.e. A CFP® professional shall be deemed to comply with this Section if the CFP® Professional’s Firm is subject to, and the CFP® professional complies with, Regulation S-P under the federal securities laws or substantially equivalent federal or state laws or rules.Provide Information to a Clienta. When Providing Financial Advice. When providing or agreeing to provide Financial Advice that does not require Financial Planning in accordance with the Practice Standards, a CFP® professional must provide the following information to the Client, prior to or at the time of the Engagement, and document that the information has been provided to the Client:i. A description of the services and products to be provided;ii. How the Client pays for the products and services, and a description of the additional types of costs that the Client may incur, including product management fees, surrender charges, and sales loads;iii. How the CFP® professional, the CFP® Professional’s Firm, and any Related Party are compensated for providing the products and services;iv. The existence of any public discipline or bankruptcy, and the location(s), if any, of the webpages of all relevant public websites of any governmental authority, self-regulatory organization, or professional organization that sets forth the CFP® professional’s public disciplinary history or any personal bankruptcy or business bankruptcy where the CFP® professional was a Control Person;v. The information required under Section A.5.a. (Conflict of Interest Disclosure);vi. The information required under Section A.9.d. (Written Notice Regarding Non-Public Personal Information);vii. The information required under Section A.13.a.ii. (Disclosure of Economic Benefit for Referral or Engagement of Additional Persons); andviii. Any other information about the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm that is Material to a Client’s decision to engage or continue to engage the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm.b. When Providing Financial Planning. When providing or required to provide Financial Planning in accordance with the Practice Standards, a CFP® professional must provide the following information to the Client, prior to or at the time of the Engagement, in one or more written documents:i. The information required to be provided in Sections A.10.a.i.-iv. and vi.-viii.; andii. The terms of the Engagement between the Client and the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm, including the Scope of Engagement and any limitations, the period(s) during which the services will be provided, and the Client’s responsibilities. A CFP® professional is responsible for implementing, monitoring, and updating the Financial Planning recommendation(s) unless specifically excluded from the Scope of Engagement.c. Updating Information. A CFP® professional has an ongoing obligation to provide to the Client any information that is a Material change or update to the information required to be provided to the Client. Material changes and updates to public disciplinary history or bankruptcy information must be disclosed to the Client within ninety (90) days, together with the location(s) of the relevant webpages.Duties when communicating with a clientA CFP® professional must provide a Client with accurate information, in accordance with the Engagement, and in response to reasonable Client requests, in a manner and format that a Client reasonably may be expected to understand.Duties when representing compensation method1. A CFP® professional may not make false or misleading representations regarding the CFP® professional’s or the CFP® Professional’s Firm’s method(s) of compensation.a. Specific Representationsi. Fee-Only. A CFP® professional may represent his or her or the CFP® Professional’s Firm’s compensation method as “fee-only” only if:1. The CFP® professional and the CFP® Professional’s Firm receive no Sales-Related Compensation; and2. Related Parties receive no Sales-Related Compensation in connection with any Professional Services the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm provides to Clients.ii. Fee-Based. CFP Board uses the term “fee and commission” to describe the compensation method of those who receive both fees and Sales-Related Compensation. A CFP® professional who represents that his or her or the CFP® Professional’s Firm’s compensation method is “fee- based” or any other similar term that is not fee-only:1. May not use the term in a manner that suggests the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm is fee-only; and2. Must clearly state that either the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm earns fees and commissions, or that the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm are not fee- only.iii. Sales-Related Compensation. Sales-Related Compensation is more than a de minimis economic benefit, including any bonus or portion of compensation, resulting from a Client purchasing or selling Financial Assets, from a Client holding Financial Assets for purposes other than receiving Financial Advice, or from the referral of a Client to any person or entity other than the CFP® Professional’s Firm. Sales-Related Compensation includes, for example, commissions, trailing commissions, 12b-1 fees, spreads, transaction fees, revenue sharing, referral or solicitor fees, or similar consideration. Sales-Related Compensation does not include:1. Soft dollars (any research or other benefits received in connection with Client brokerage that qualifies for the “safe harbor” of Section 28(e) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934);2. Reasonable and customary fees for custodial or similar administrative services if the fee or amount of the fee is not determined based on the amount or value of Client transactions;3. Non-monetary benefits provided by another service provider, including a custodian, that benefit the CFP® professional’s Clients by improving the CFP® professional’s delivery of Professional Services, and that are not determined based on the amount or value of Client transactions;4. Reasonable and customary fees for Professional Services, other than for solicitations and referrals, the CFP® professional or CFP® Professional’s Firm provides to a Client that are collected and distributed by another service provider, including under a Turnkey Asset Management Platform; or5. A fee the Related Party solicitor receives for soliciting clients for the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm.iv. Related Party. A person or business entity (including a trust) whose receipt of Sales-Related Compensation a reasonable CFP® professional would view as directly or indirectly benefiting the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm, including, for example, as a result of the CFP® professional’s ownership stake in the business entity. There is a rebuttable presumption that a Related Party includes:1. Family Members. A member of the CFP® professional’s Family and any business entity that the Family or members of the Family Control; and2. Business Entities. A business entity that the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm Controls, or that is Controlled by or is under common Control with, the CFP® Professional’s Firm.v. In Connection with any Professional Services. Sales-Related Compensation received by a Related Party is “in connection with any Professional Services” if it results, directly or indirectly, from Client transactions referred or facilitated by the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm.vi. Safe Harbor for Related Parties. Sales-Related Compensation received by a Related Party is not “in connection with any Professional Services” if the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm adopts and implements policies and procedures reasonably designed to prevent the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm from recommending that any Client purchase Financial Assets from or through, or refer any Clients to, the Related Party.vii. Misrepresentations by a CFP® Professional’s Firm. A CFP® professional who Controls the CFP® Professional’s Firm may not allow the CFP® Professional’s Firm to make a representation of compensation method that would be false or misleading if made by the CFP® professional. A CFP® professional who does not Control the CFP® Professional’s Firm must correct a CFP® Professional’s Firm’s misrepresentations of compensation method by accurately representing the CFP® professional’s compensation method to the CFP® professional’s Clients.Financial Planning and the Application of the Practice Standards for the financial planning processSection 2 of the CFP Board's Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct outlines the Financial Planning Process and Application of the Standards for Financial Planning. This section describes the steps that CFP professionals must follow when providing financial planning services, and how they must apply the CFP Board's Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct in their practice. Here is an overview of each section of Section 2:1. Establishing and Defining the Client-Planner Relationship: This section describes the initial steps that CFP professionals must take when entering into a financial planning engagement with a client. CFP professionals must establish and define the client-planner relationship, including the scope of the engagement, the services to be provided, and the compensation to be paid.2. Gathering Client Data and Identifying Goals: This section describes the steps that CFP professionals must take to gather relevant client data and identify the client's goals and objectives. CFP professionals must obtain a clear understanding of the client's financial situation, including their assets, liabilities, income, and expenses, and must identify the client's short-term and long-term financial goals.3. Application of practice standards: The Practice Standards set forth the Financial Planning Process. A CFP® professional must comply with the Practice Standards when:The CFP® professional agrees to provide or provides:Financial Planning; orFinancial Advice that requires integration of relevant elements of the Client’s personal and/ or financial circumstances in order to act in the Client’s best interests (“Financial Advice that Requires Financial Planning”); orThe Client has a reasonable basis to believe the CFP® professional will provide or has provided Financial Planning.4. Integration Factors: This subsection outlines the factors that CFP professionals must consider when integrating financial planning recommendations into the client's overall financial situation. CFP professionals must take into account factors such as the client's tax situation, risk tolerance, and overall financial goals when developing and implementing financial planning recommendations.5. CFP Board Evaluation: This subsection describes the evaluation process that the CFP Board uses to ensure that CFP professionals are meeting the standards set forth in the Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct. The CFP Board may conduct periodic evaluations of CFP professionals to ensure that they are adhering to the standards, and may take disciplinary action if necessary.6. No Client Agreement to Engage for Financial Planning: This subsection outlines the circumstances under which a CFP professional may provide incidental financial planning advice to a client without entering into a formal financial planning engagement. CFP professionals must ensure that they clearly communicate the limited nature of the advice being provided and that the client understands that the advice is not part of a formal financial planning engagement.The CFP must either not enter the engagement, limit the scope to services that do no require application of practice standards, provide the requested services after informing the client how financial planning would benefit the client and how decision not to engage the CFP® professional to provide Financial Planning may limit the CFP® professional’s Financial Advice, in which case the CFP® professional is not required to comply with the Practice Standards; or terminate the engagement. Overall, Section 2 of the CFP Board's Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct provides a comprehensive framework for the financial planning process and the application of standards for financial planning. Practice Standards for the Financial Planning process1. UNDERSTANDING THE CLIENT’S PERSONAL AND FINANCIAL CIRCUMSTANCESa. Obtaining Qualitative and Quantitative Information. A CFP® professional must describe to the Client the qualitative and quantitative information concerning the Client’s personal and financial circumstances needed to fulfill the Scope of Engagement and collaborate with the Client to obtain the information.i. Examples of qualitative or subjective information include the Client’s health, life expectancy, family circumstances, values, attitudes, expectations, earnings potential, risk tolerance, goals, needs, priorities, and current course of action.ii. Examples of quantitative or objective information include the Client’s age, dependents, other professional advisors, income, expenses, cash flow, savings, assets, liabilities, available resources, liquidity, taxes, employee benefits, government benefits, insurance coverage, estate plans, education and retirement accounts and benefits, and capacity for risk.b. Analyzing Information. A CFP® professional must analyze the qualitative and quantitative information to assess the Client’s personal and financial circumstances.c. Addressing Incomplete Information. If unable to obtain information necessary to fulfill the Scope of Engagement, the CFP® professional must either limit the Scope of Engagement to those services the CFP® professional is able to provide or terminate the Engagement.2. IDENTIFYING AND SELECTING GOALSa. Identifying Potential Goals. A CFP® professional must discuss with the Client the CFP® professional’s assessment of the Client’s financial and personal circumstances, and help the Client identify goals, noting the effect that selecting a particular goal may have on other goals. In helping the Client identify goals, the CFP® professional must discuss with the Client, and apply, reasonable assumptions and estimates. These may include life expectancy, inflation rates, tax rates, investment returns, and other Material assumptions and estimates.b. Selecting and Prioritizing Goals. A CFP® professional must help the Client select and prioritize goals. The CFP® professional must discuss with the Client any goals the Client has selected that the CFP® professional believes are not realistic.3. ANALYZING THE CLIENT’S CURRENT COURSE OF ACTION AND POTENTIAL ALTERNATIVE COURSE(S) OF ACTIONa. Analyzing Current Course of Action. A CFP® professional must analyze the Client’s current course of action, including the material advantages and disadvantages of the current course and whether the current course maximizes the potential for meeting the Client’s goals.b. Analyzing Potential Alternative Courses of Action. Where appropriate a CFP® professional must consider and analyze one or more potential alternative courses of action, including the material advantages and disadvantages of each alternative, whether each alternative helps maximize the potential for meeting the Client’s goals, and how each alternative integrates the relevant elements of the Client’s personal and financial circumstances.4. DEVELOPING THE FINANCIAL PLANNING RECOMMENDATION(S)From the potential courses of action, a CFP® professional must select one or more recommendations designed to maximize the potential for meeting the Client’s goals. The recommendation may be to continue the Client’s current course of action. For each recommendation selected, the CFP® professional must consider the following information:a. The assumptions and estimates used to develop the recommendation;b. The basis for making the recommendation, including how the recommendation is designedto maximize the potential to meet the Client’s goals, the anticipated material effects of the recommendation on the Client’s financial and personal circumstances, and how the recommendation integrates relevant elements of the Client’s personal and financial circumstances;c. The timing and priority of the recommendation; andd. Whether the recommendation is independent or must be implemented with another recommendation.5. PRESENTING THE FINANCIAL PLANNING RECOMMENDATION(S)A CFP® professional must present to the Client the selected recommendations and the information that was required to be considered when developing the recommendation(s).IMPLEMENTING THE FINANCIAL PLANNING RECOMMENDATION(S)a. Addressing Implementation Responsibilities. A CFP® professional must establish with the Client whether the CFP® professional has implementation responsibilities. When the CFP® professional has implementation responsibilities, the CFP® professional must communicate to the Client the recommendation(s) being implemented and the responsibilities of the CFP® professional, the Client, and any third party with respect to implementation.b. Identifying,Analyzing, and Selecting Actions, Products, and Services. A CFP® professional who has implementation responsibilities must identify and analyze actions, products, and services designed to implement the recommendations. The CFP® professional must consider the basis for each selection, which must include:i. How the action, product, or service is designed to implement the CFP® professional’s recommendation; andii. The advantages and disadvantages of the action, product, or service relative to reasonably available alternatives.c. Recommending Actions, Products, and Services for Implementation. A CFP® professional who has implementation responsibilities must recommend one or more actions, products and services to the Client. The CFP® professional must discuss with the Client the basis for selecting an action, product, or service, the timing and priority of implementing the action, product, or service, and disclose and manage any Material Conflicts of Interest concerning the action, product, or service.d. Selecting and Implementing Actions, Products, or Services. A CFP® professional who has implementation responsibilities must help the Client select and implement the actions, products, or services. The CFP® professional must discuss with the Client any Client selection that deviates from the actions, products, and services the CFP® professional recommended.6. MONITORING PROGRESS AND UPDATINGa. Monitoring and Updating Responsibilities. A CFP® professional must establish with the Client whether the CFP® professional has monitoring and updating responsibilities. When the CFP® professional has responsibilities for monitoring and updating, the CFP® professional must communicate to the Client:i. Which actions, products, and services are and are not subject to the CFP® professional’s monitoring responsibility;ii. How and when the CFP® professional will monitor the actions, products, and services;iii. The Client’s responsibility to inform the CFP® professional of any Material changes to the Client’s qualitative and quantitative information;iv. The CFP® professional’s responsibility to update the Financial Planning recommendations; andv. How and when the CFP® professional will update the Financial Planning recommendations.b. Monitoring the Client’s Progress. A CFP® professional who has monitoring responsibilities must analyze, at appropriate intervals, the progress toward achieving the Client’s goals. The CFP® professional must review with the Client the results of the CFP® professional’s analysis.c. Obtaining Current Qualitative and Quantitative Information. A CFP® professional who has monitoring responsibility must collaborate with the Client in an attempt to obtain current qualitative and quantitative information concerning the Client’s personal and financial circumstances.d. Updating Goals, Recommendations, or Implementation Decisions. Where a CFP® professional has updating responsibility, and circumstances warrant changes to the Client’s goals, recommendations, or selections of actions, products or services, the CFP® professional must update as appropriate in accordance with these Practice Standards.DUTIES OWED TO FIRMS AND SUBORDINATES 1. USE REASONABLE CARE WHEN SUPERVISINGA CFP® professional must exercise reasonable care when supervising persons acting under the CFP® professional’s direction, including employees and other persons over whom the CFP® professional has responsibility, with a view toward preventing violations of applicable laws, rules, regulations, and these Standards.2. COMPLY WITH LAWFUL OBJECTIVES OF CFP® PROFESSIONAL’S FIRMA CFP® professional:1. Will be subject to discipline by CFP Board for violating policies and procedures of the CFP® Professional’s Firm that do not conflict with these Standards.2. Will not be subject to discipline by CFP Board for violating policies and procedures of the CFP® Professional’s Firm that conflict with these Standards.3. PROVIDE NOTICE OF PUBLIC DISCIPLINEA CFP® professional must promptly advise the CFP® Professional’s Firm, in writing, of any public discipline imposed by CFP BoardE. Duties to the CFP BOARD      DEFINITIONS      The following definitions apply:1. Felony. A felony offense, or for jurisdictions that do not differentiate between a felony and a misdemeanor, an offense punishable by a sentence of at least one-year imprisonment or a fine of at least $1,000.2. Relevant Misdemeanor. A criminal offense, that is not a Felony, for conduct involving fraud,theft, misrepresentation, other dishonest conduct, crimes of moral turpitude, violence, or a second (or more) alcohol and/or drug-related offense.3. Regulatory Investigation. An investigation initiated by a federal, state, local, or foreign governmental agency, self-regulatory organization, or other regulatory authority. A Regulatory Investigation does not include preliminary or routine regulatory inquiries or requests for information, deficiency letters, “blue sheet” requests or other trading questionnaires, or examinations.4. Regulatory Action. An action initiated by a federal, state, local, or foreign governmental agency, self- regulatory organization, or other regulatory authority.5. Civil Action. A lawsuit or arbitration.6. Finding. A finding includes an adverse final action and a consent decree in which the finding is neither admitted nor denied, but does not include a deficiency letter, examination report, memorandum of understanding, or similar informal resolution of a matter.7. Minor Rule Violation. A violation of a self-regulatory organization rule designated as a minor rule violation under a plan approved by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. A rule violation may be designated as “minor” under a plan if the sanction imposed consists of a fine of $2,500 or less, and if the sanctioned person does not contest the fine.ii. REFRAIN FROM ADVERSE CONDUCTA CFP® professional may not engage in conduct that reflects adversely on his or her integrity or fitness as a CFP® professional, upon the CFP® marks, or upon the profession. Such conduct includes, but is not limited to, conduct that results in:1. A Felony or Relevant Misdemeanor conviction, or admission into a program that defers or with holds the entry of a judgment of conviction for a Felony or Relevant Misdemeanor;2. A Finding in a Regulatory Action or a Civil Action that the CFP® professional engaged in fraud, theft, misrepresentation, or other dishonest conduct;3. A personal bankruptcy or business bankruptcy filing or adjudication where the CFP® professional was a Control Person of the business, unless the CFP® professional can rebut the presumption that the bankruptcy demonstrates an inability to manage responsibly the CFP® professional’s or the business’s financial affairs;4. A federal tax lien on property owned by the CFP® professional, unless the CFP® professional can rebut the presumption that the federal tax lien demonstrates an inability to manage responsibly the CFP® professional’s financial affairs; or5. A non-federal tax lien, judgment lien, or civil judgment that has not been satisfied within a reasonable amount of time unless the CFP® professional can rebut the presumption that the non- federal tax lien, judgment lien, or civil judgment demonstrates an inability to manage responsibly the CFP® professional’s financial affairs.iii. REPORTINGA CFP® professional must provide written notice to CFP Board within thirty (30) calendar days after the CFP® professional, or an entity over which the CFP® professional was a Control Person, has:1. Been charged with, convicted of, or admitted into a program that defers or withholds the entry of a judgment or conviction for, a Felony or Relevant Misdemeanor;2. Been named as a subject of, or whose conduct is mentioned adversely in, a Regulatory Investigation or Regulatory Action alleging failure to comply with the laws, rules, or regulations governing Professional Services;3. Had conduct mentioned adversely in a Finding in a Regulatory Action involving failure to comply with the laws, rules, or regulations governing Professional Services (except a Regulatory Action involving a Minor Rule Violation in a Regulatory Action brought by a self-regulatory organization);4. Had conduct mentioned adversely in a Civil Action alleging failure to comply with the laws, rules, or regulations governing Professional Services;5. Become aware of an adverse arbitration award or civil judgment, or a settlement agreement, in a Civil Action alleging failure to comply with the laws, rules, or regulations governing Professional Services, where the conduct of the CFP® professional, or an entity over which the CFP® professional was a Control Person, was mentioned adversely, other than a settlement for an amount less than $15,000;6. Had conduct mentioned adversely in a Civil Action alleging fraud, theft, misrepresentation, or other dishonest conduct;7. Been the subject of a Finding of fraud, theft, misrepresentation, or other dishonest conduct in a Regulatory Action or Civil Action;8. Become aware of an adverse arbitration award or civil judgment, or a settlement agreement in a Civil Action alleging fraud, theft, misrepresentation, or other dishonest conduct, where the conduct of the CFP® professional, or an entity over which the CFP® professional was a Control Person, was mentioned adversely;9. Had a professional license, certification, or membership suspended, revoked, or materially restricted because of a violation of rules or standards of conduct;10. Been terminated for cause from employment or permitted to resign in lieu of termination when the cause of the termination or resignation involved allegations of dishonesty, unethical conduct, or compliance failures;11. Been named as the subject of, or been identified as the broker/adviser of record in, any written, customer-initiated complaint that alleged the CFP® professional was involved in:1. Forgery, theft, misappropriation, or conversion of Financial Assets;2. Sales practice violations and contained a claim for compensation of $5,000 or more; or3. Sales practice violations and settled for an amount of $15,000 or more.12. Filed for or been the subject of a personal bankruptcy or business bankruptcy where the CFP® professional was a Control Person;13. Received notice of a federal tax lien on property owned by the CFP® professional; or14. Failed to satisfy a non-federal tax lien, judgment lien, or civil judgment within one year of its date of entry, unless payment arrangements have been agreed upon by all parties.iv. PROVIDE NARRATIVE STATEMENTThe written notice must include a narrative statement that accurately and completely describes the Material facts and the outcome or status of the reportable matter.v. COOPERATIONA CFP® professional may not make false or misleading representations to CFP Board or obstruct CFP Board in the performance of its duties. A CFP® professional must satisfy the cooperation requirements set forth in CFP Board’s Procedural Rules, including by cooperating fully with CFP Board’s requests, investigations, disciplinary proceedings, and disciplinary decisions.vi. COMPLIANCE WITH TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF CERTIFICATION AND TRADEMARK LICENSEA CFP® professional must comply with the Terms and Conditions of Certification and Trademark License.PROHIBITION ON CIRCUMVENTIONA CFP® professional may not do indirectly, or through or by another person or entity, any act or thing that the Code and Standards prohibit the CFP® professional from doing directly.2. Some key points to note about the fiduciary duty subcategory include:* The fiduciary duty is a legal and ethical obligation that CFP professionals have to their clients.* The fiduciary duty requires CFP professionals to act with undivided loyalty to their clients, putting the client's interests ahead of their own.* CFP professionals must provide objective and unbiased advice that is tailored to the client's specific needs and goals.* CFP professionals must disclose any conflicts of interest that may arise in the course of the financial planning engagement, and to manage those conflicts in a way that is fair and transparent to the client.* The fiduciary duty requires CFP professionals to act with the utmost care, skill, and diligence in providing financial planning services to clients, and to avoid any actions or recommendations that are not in the best interests of the client.* The fiduciary duty applies to all aspects of the financial planning engagement, including the initial consultation, the development of the financial plan, and the ongoing monitoring and review of the client's financial situation.Duties when recommending, engaging, and working with additional persons1. a. When engaging or recommending the selection or retention of additional persons to provide financial or Professional Services for a Client, a CFP® professional must:i. Have a reasonable basis for the recommendation or Engagement based on the person’s reputation, experience, and qualifications;ii. Disclose to the Client, at the time of the recommendation or prior to the Engagement, any arrangement by which someone who is not the Client will compensate or provide some other material economic benefit to the CFP® professional, the CFP® Professional’s Firm, or a Related Party for the recommendation or Engagement; andiii. When engaging a person to provide services for a Client, exercise reasonable care to protect the Client’s interests.b. When working with another financial or Professional Services provider on behalf of a Client, a CFP® professional must:i. Communicate with the other provider about the scope of their respective services and the allocation of responsibility between them; andii. Inform the Client in a timely manner if the CFP® professional has a reasonable belief that the other provider’s services were not performed in accordance with the scope of services to be provided and the allocation of responsibilities.Duties when selecting, using, and recommending technologya. A CFP® professional must exercise reasonable care and judgment when selecting, using, or recommending any software, digital advice tool, or other technology while providing Professional Services to a Client.b. A CFP® professional must have a reasonable level of understanding of the assumptions and outcomes of the technology employed.c. A CFP® professional must have a reasonable basis for believing that the technology produces reliable, objective, and appropriate outcomes.Refrain from borrowing or lending money and commingling financial assetsa. A CFP® professional may not, directly or indirectly, borrow money from or lend money to a Client unless:i. The Client is a member of the CFP® professional’s Family; orii. The lender is a business organization or legal entity in the business of lending money.b. A CFP® professional may not commingle a Client’s Financial Assets with the Financial Assets of the CFP® professional or the CFP® Professional’s Firm.Above is a summary of the standard of ‘duties to clients.’Financial Planning ProcessThe Financial Planning Process standard is one of the seven Standards of Conduct outlined in the CFP Board's Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct. This standard outlines the steps that CFP professionals must follow when providing financial planning services to clients. Here is a more in-depth description of the financial planning process:1. Establishing and Defining the Client Relationship: The first step in the financial planning process is to establish and define the client relationship. This includes determining the scope of the engagement, the services to be provided, and the responsibilities of both the CFP professional and the client.2. Gathering Client Data and Determining Goals and Objectives: The next step is to gather client data, including information about the client's financial situation, goals, and objectives. The CFP professional must analyze this information to determine the client's financial needs and priorities.3. Analyzing and Evaluating the Client's Financial Status: Once the client data has been gathered, the CFP professional must analyze and evaluate the client's financial status. This includes assessing the client's current financial situation, identifying any potential risks or obstacles, and developing a plan to address them.4. Developing and Presenting Financial Planning Recommendations and Alternatives: Based on the analysis and evaluation of the client's financial status, the CFP professional must develop and present financial planning recommendations and alternatives. These recommendations should be tailored to the client's specific needs and goals, and should take into account any risks or obstacles that were identified during the analysis.5. Implementing the Financial Planning Recommendations: Once the client has agreed to the financial planning recommendations, the CFP professional must implement the plan. This may involve assisting the client with opening accounts, transferring assets, purchasing insurance, or taking other actions to help the client achieve their financial goals.6. Monitoring the Financial Planning Recommendations and Updating Them as Necessary: The final step in the financial planning process is to monitor the financial planning recommendations and update them as necessary. This includes reviewing the client's progress, assessing any changes in their financial situation or goals, and making adjustments to the plan as needed.DisclosuresThe Disclosures standard is one of the seven Standards of Conduct outlined in the CFP Board's Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct. This standard requires CFP professionals to provide full disclosure of all material facts that could affect the client's financial planning decisions, as well as any conflicts of interest. Here is a more in-depth description of the Disclosures standard:1. Full Disclosure of Material Facts: CFP professionals must provide full disclosure of all material facts that could affect the client's financial planning decisions. This includes disclosing any risks, benefits, costs, or other important information related to the financial planning recommendations being made. The CFP professional must ensure that the client understands the nature and scope of the recommendation, and any potential consequences that may result from following the recommendation.2. Conflicts of Interest Disclosure: CFP professionals must disclose any conflicts of interest that may affect the financial planning advice they provide to clients. This includes disclosing any financial or other interests that the CFP professional or their firm may have in any products or services that are recommended to the client. The disclosure must be made in a clear and conspicuous manner, and must be made prior to the recommendation being made.3. Written Disclosure: In some cases, the disclosure must be made in writing. This includes situations where the recommendation involves a significant financial transaction, or where the disclosure is required by law or regulation. The written disclosure must be provided to the client prior to the recommendation being made.4. Ongoing Disclosure: The disclosure requirement is ongoing, which means that CFP professionals must disclose any new or additional information that becomes relevant to the financial planning recommendation. This includes disclosing any changes in the CFP professional's financial or other interests, as well as any changes in the client's financial situation or goals.5. Compliance with Applicable Laws and Regulations: CFP professionals must comply with all applicable laws and regulations related to disclosure, including those related to securities, insurance, and financial planning. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations can result in disciplinary action by the CFP Board.Confidentiality and PrivacyThe Confidentiality and Privacy standard is one of the seven Standards of Conduct outlined in the CFP Board's Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct. This standard requires CFP professionals to maintain the confidentiality of client information and to protect clients' privacy, except in certain circumstances such as when required by law or when authorized by the client. Here is a more in-depth description of the Confidentiality and Privacy standard:1. Maintaining Confidentiality: CFP professionals must maintain the confidentiality of client information, which includes any information that is obtained or created during the course of the financial planning engagement. This information must be kept confidential, and must not be disclosed to any third parties without the client's consent, except in certain circumstances such as when required by law or when authorized by the client.2. Protecting Privacy: CFP professionals must take reasonable steps to protect clients' privacy, which includes safeguarding client information against unauthorized access, use, or disclosure. This may involve implementing security measures such as password protection, encryption, or firewalls, and ensuring that any third-party service providers that have access to client information are also taking adequate security measures.3. Exceptions to Confidentiality and Privacy: There are certain circumstances where CFP professionals may be required to breach confidentiality or privacy, such as when required by law or when authorized by the client. In these cases, the CFP professional must inform the client of the breach and seek their consent before disclosing any confidential or private information.4. Written Policies and Procedures: CFP professionals must have written policies and procedures in place to ensure that client information is kept confidential and private. These policies and procedures must be communicated to all employees and agents of the firm, and must be reviewed and updated on a regular basis.5. Compliance with Applicable Laws and Regulations: CFP professionals must comply with all applicable laws and regulations related to confidentiality and privacy, including those related to data privacy, data security, and financial planning. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations can result in disciplinary action by the CFP Board.Duties to EmployerThe Duties to Employers standard is one of the seven Standards of Conduct outlined in the CFP Board's Code of Ethics and Standards of Conduct. This standard outlines the duties that CFP professionals have to their employers, including the obligation to comply with company policies and procedures, act in the best interests of the employer, and avoid conflicts of interest. Here is a more in-depth description of the Duties to Employers standard:1. Compliance with Company Policies and Procedures: CFP professionals must comply with the policies and procedures of their employer or the firm they are affiliated with, including those related to client service, conflicts of interest, and professional conduct.2. Acting in the Best Interests of the Employer: CFP professionals must act in the best interests of their employer or the firm they are affiliated with. This includes protecting the firm's reputation, safeguarding its assets, and avoiding any actions that could harm the firm.3. Avoiding Conflicts of Interest: CFP professionals must avoid conflicts of interest that may arise in the course of their employment. This includes disclosing any financial or other interests that the CFP professional may have in any products or services that are recommended to clients.4. Professionalism: CFP professionals must maintain a high level of professionalism in their interactions with clients, colleagues, and others. This includes adhering to applicable laws and regulations, avoiding any conduct that reflects adversely on the profession, and participating in ongoing professional development.5. Duty of Loyalty: CFP professionals have a duty of loyalty to their employer or the firm they are affiliated with. This includes acting in the best interests of the firm, avoiding any actions that could harm the firm, and disclosing any conflicts of interest that may arise.6. Confidentiality: CFP professionals must maintain the confidentiality of any information related to the firm or its clients, except in certain circumstances such as when required by law or when authorized by the firm.7. Compliance with Applicable Laws and Regulations: CFP professionals must comply with all applicable laws and regulations related to their employment, including those related to securities, insurance, and financial planning.