A.6A. Fiduciary standard and its importance to the planner-client relationshipThe fiduciary standard is the highest standard of care for financial advisors. It means advisors must act in the best interests of their clients, put clients' interests first, and avoid conflicts of interest. This is important to the client-planner relationship because:* It aligns the advisor's interests with the client's. The advisor must provide advice and recommendations that benefit the client, not the advisor or a third party.* It requires prudent and diligent decision-making. The advisor must thoroughly evaluate options and make prudent recommendations, not just suitable but optimal choices for the client's needs.* It mandates transparency and disclosure. The advisor must disclose all fees, conflicts, and other information so the client understands the advisor's duties and limitations.* It gives clients more protection. By imposing a strict standard of care and disclosure, the fiduciary standard gives clients more confidence that the advisor is working in their best interests. Financial planners may be subject to a variety of conflicts of interest that could impact their ability to provide objective advice to their clients. Here are some common conflicts of interest that financial planners may face:1. Commission-based compensation: Financial planners who are compensated through commissions on the products they sell may be incentivized to recommend products that are not in the best interests of their clients but generate higher commissions for the planner. While less common in today’s world, it is still worth looking for. Some examples may include: fixed or variable annuities, insurance products, A share mutual funds, company proprietary products, or commissions based on trading. 2. Proprietary product conflicts: Financial planners who work for firms that offer proprietary products may be incentivized to recommend those products over products offered by other firms, even if the proprietary products are not the best fit for their clients. These products may have historically worse performance metrics and/or have higher fees. 3. Referral fees: Financial planners who receive referral fees from other professionals, such as attorneys or accountants, may be incentivized to refer their clients to those professionals even if there are better options available. A planner should disclose any arrangements it might have with another professional. 4. Personal investments: Financial planners who have personal investments in certain products or companies may be biased in favor of those investments and may be more likely to recommend them to their clients.5. Dual registration: Financial planners who are dually registered as both investment advisors and brokers may be incentivized to recommend products that generate higher commissions as brokers, even if those products are not the best fit for their clients. An example of this is a dual registered financial advisor, who may also sell insurance based investment products alongside also be an investment advisor. While this isn’t necessarily a bad thing and can allow more flexibility in an advisor’s offerings, it can present a conflict of interest and recommendations should be adequately documented as to why certain recommendations were made that might be perceived as not in the client’s best interest. 6. Incentives from third parties: Financial planners who receive incentives, such as trips or gifts, from third-party providers of products or services may be biased in favor of those providers and may be more likely to recommend their products or services to their clients. Even flights/hotels to certain product conferences should be disclosed. Gifts or compensation for research/events should also be disclosed and documented with compliance. 