B.10D. Types of client debt and recommendations for managementClient debt:1. Credit card debt: Credit card debt is a common type of debt that can be difficult to manage due to high interest rates and minimum payments. To manage credit card debt, consider paying more than the minimum payment each month, consolidating debt into a lower-interest loan or balance transfer credit card, and avoiding adding new charges to the credit card. Unless paid down each month which most don’t do, this should not be looked at as a way for rewards points. 2. Student loan debt: Student loan debt is a type of debt that is typically taken on to finance higher education. To manage student loan debt, consider enrolling in an income-driven repayment plan, refinancing the loan to a lower interest rate, and making extra payments when possible. If you work in an area for public student loan forgiveness after 10 years, consider this but this also may reduce your flexibility in where you live and work. The method of pay down depends on income and amount. 3. Auto loan debt: Auto loan debt is a type of debt that is used to purchase a vehicle. To manage auto loan debt, consider paying more than the minimum payment each month, choosing a shorter loan term to reduce interest charges, and avoiding buying more car than you can afford. It pays to be handy with cars, as generally for most people it is not affordable to take your car into a dealership for service often, or replace your car every 5 years. 4. Mortgage debt: Mortgage debt is a type of debt that is used to purchase a home. To manage mortgage debt, the biggest thing is to not get a house too big in which you can afford. Housing debt payments should not exceed 28% of your gross income, and this is a rather sound rule. 5. Personal loan debt: Personal loan debt is a type of debt that is typically used for a specific purpose, such as home improvements or debt consolidation. To manage personal loan debt, consider paying more than the minimum payment each month, consolidating debt into a lower-interest loan, and avoiding taking on new debt.Consumer debt that includes credit cards, personal loans, student loans, and vehicle loans should not exceed 20% of your net income. Total debt payments should not exceed 36% of gross income. However this is not necessarily the case, but generally rules in which you may strive for as you may not be able to save in other areas as you need to, which will further hinder your financial plan and financial strength later on. Your financial maneuverability is the key to happiness and a stress free life in not just ways of money, but also life. 