B.10C. House Finance strategiesSaving for a house is one of the biggest financial decisions someone will make. Here are some general housing finance strategies that can help you achieve your financial goals:1. Save for a down payment: Saving for a down payment is an important part of the homebuying process. The larger your down payment, the lower your monthly mortgage payment and the less you'll pay in interest over time. While the general rule is to save 20% to avoid PMI (primary mortgage insurance)  this is generally not feasible as it was for our parents generation. Recent studies coming out showing the average home in the average city, the average homeowner will need income of at least 6 figures to support the payment. Further, the disappearance of homes under $200,000 across America has happened as of 2022, so most lower price range homes will put you within the 200-300 thousand range. For a first home it would be nice to have $60,000 for the down payment, but this isn’t generally feasible for someone’s first home in their 20’s or 30’s. As such, I still try to encourage someone to get around 5-10% of their down payment if they can. A key is to also balance, as you will need emergency savings, and important to not let retirement savings completely stop as a result either. 2. Get pre-approved for a mortgage: Getting pre-approved for a mortgage can help you understand how much you can afford to spend on a home and help you act quickly enough should you be looking currently. Word of advice however: Even after the regulatory improvements after the Great Recession in 2008, sometimes lenders will approve you for a certain amount, but just because they approve of you based off a certain income level does not mean you should. This goes for many loans/auto loans/credit cards. An example: a physician couple earning $500,000/year may get approved for a $2 million dollar home loan. Technically, yes they can afford it. But what we must also keep in mind is their retirement, their savings, the liquidity of a 2 million dollar home in a recession environment, the upkeep and property taxes of such a high priced home, general taxes and lifestyle expenses, and of course the student loans in which the new physicians must pay. On a surface level they may be able to afford the home, but they will be house poor and this will permanently affect their financial plan going forward. You need to also assess your monthly payment/taxes/upkeep and can you actually afford it. 3. Consider your mortgage options: There are several types of mortgages available, including fixed-rate mortgages, adjustable-rate mortgages, and government-backed mortgages. Consider your options carefully and choose the one that works best for your financial situation and goals. Also, talk to a mortgage lender to see what types of programs might be available for a unique situation you might qualify for. Generally, these are VA, first time homeowner loans, etc. While the payment on a few might be lower, keep in mind the interest payment and terms of any special loans. Generally, the traditional fixed rate mortgage is best, and any balloon payment type loans are generally too risky unless you’re a seasoned real estate investor. 4. Figure out the best mortgage rates available, and best mortgage rates available with your income/credit score. You can typically get a range online without having to fill out online forms. Also, don’t generally try to game or time interest rates when choosing a loan, especially in a rising interest rate environment like 2022. 5. Consider refinancing: If interest rates have dropped since you purchased your home, consider refinancing your mortgage to take advantage of lower rates. This is an overly general rule, but typically the interest rates will have to drop a full % point or more for refinancing your home to make sense considering valuation and closing costs. As of 2023, this won’t likely be a great option unless interest rates fall below 5% again. 6. Budget for home maintenance and repairs: Homeownership comes with additional expenses, such as maintenance and repairs. One could go on for days of what these might be such as HVAC, garage, plumbing, etc. Don’t just budget for renovation, but a budget of at least a few hundred/month should be to budget for repairs that pop up. If you’re not handy, becoming handy can be a big time saver. Ask for tips on how to be handy or save certain ways. 