B.10B. Debt management plan 1. Prioritize high-interest debt: If you have multiple debts, prioritize the ones with the highest interest rates. Paying off high-interest debt first can save you money on interest charges over time. While this is the best general rule, the psychology of debt plays an important factor too. For example if a loan is only a percent or two lower than the higher interest rate loan, but the balance is much smaller and you can pay off in a few months, it might be better to ‘snowball’ your payoff and payoff the lower amount and lower interest loan to help you psychologically feel like you are making progress and get one loan down. This method is generally only better if interest rates are somewhat similar, and the balance can be paid off relatively quickly such as less than half a year. 2. Consider debt consolidation: If you have multiple debts with high interest rates, consider consolidating them into a single loan with a lower interest rate. This can help you save money on interest charges and simplify your debt repayment. However in high interest rate cycles this may not be as great an option for your previous fixed rate loans, and keep in mind you lose benefits of loan forgiveness and other potential benefits if you consolidate your federal student loans. 3. Create a budget: Creating a budget can help you identify areas where you can reduce expenses and free up money to put towards debt repayment. Be sure to include debt payments as part of your budget. Look at your debt ratios and find ways to increase your extra cash flow savings so that you can pay down the debt. After looking at your debt ratios and debt balance sheet, it is then easier to formulate a plan on how you can pay down each portion of your debt. What I find a lot of times is people are paying down extra principal of the tune of a few hundred dollars a month on a lower interest home loan instead of paying down their car or their other personal loans quicker. Whilst I applaud the effort to pay down debt quicker, there can be smarter strategies as stated above, by general prioritizing the higher interest debt. Being able to organize all the debt into one or a few pages in a simple table to be able to assess is the easiest way to then formulate a strategy to tackle. There isn’t necessarily one correct way to always tackle the debt, but you need to be able to see if general cash flow supports it at first, and if not more drastic changes may be needed. 