B.11A. Economic concepts and measures in making financial plan recommendationsi. Supply and demand: Understanding the supply and demand of goods and services is a crucial part of financial planning. Supply and demand can help you make informed decisions about what to invest in and when to invest. If the demand for a product or service is high, it may be a good investment opportunity. On the other hand, if the supply of a product is high, it may not be a wise investment option. For example: when a client is interested in buying a car, the time frame of 2021-2022 was not necessarily a good time due to historically high demand in the auto markets raising new and used car prices at this time. Further, supply for parts was also low thereby increasing the costs of vehicles. Thus it was best to encourage to client to wait as long as possible, or until supply and demand stabilized.  According to the law of supply, as the price of a good increases, the quantity supplied increases  According to the law of demand, as the price of a good increases, the quantity demanded decreases The price of goods and services is constantly changing in an attempt to reach equilibrium When supply and demand reach equilibrium, the allocation of goods and services is at its most efficient level. A supply curve shift may occur when there are changes in resource prices, changes in technology, natural disasters, and political disruption. A demand curve shift may occur when there are changes in consumer expectations, consumer income, consumer tastes and preferences, number of consumers changes, and changes in prices of related goods. ii. National Income Accounts (including GDP): National income accounts, such as GDP, can help you understand the strength of the economy. GDP measures the total value of all goods and services produced in a country. By analyzing GDP data, you can determine whether the economy is growing or shrinking, and make predictions on future trends.GDP = C + E + G + I o *  C = Personal consumption o *  E = Net exports o *  G = Government spending o *  I = Gross private domestic investment  A recession is a decline in real GDP for two or more quarters, where depression is a decline in GDP for six or more consecutive quarters generally. iii. Business cycles (unemployment, recession, fiscal and monetary policy): Business cycles can help you understand the state of the economy and make informed financial planning decisions. Unemployment rates and recessions can indicate economic instability, while fiscal and monetary policies can influence economic growth and stability.The contraction stage of business cycle is characterized by a recession. A trough in the business cycle is the lowest level, and expansion state of business cycle is characterized by recovery. At the peak, the GDP is at its highest point. iv. Interest rates (including its term structure and the yield curve) and inflation: Interest rates and inflation can have a significant impact on financial planning. High-interest rates can make borrowing more expensive, while inflation can reduce the value of investments. The federal reserve conducts monetary policy and influences money and credit conditions. Its goal is to ensure safety of the US banking and financial system, achieve full employment, and stabilize prices using interest rates as one of their tools. They control monetary policy such as reserve requirements, discount rate and open market operations. v. Exchange rates: Exchange rates can affect international investments and transactions. Understanding exchange rates can help you determine the best time to make international investments or transactions, and can also help you manage currency risk.One important economic concept related to exchange rates is purchasing power parity (PPP). PPP refers to the idea that in the long run, exchange rates should adjust so that the same basket of goods and services costs the same in different countries when measured in a common currency. If PPP holds, a currency that is overvalued relative to its PPP value is expected to depreciate in value, while an undervalued currency is expected to appreciate.Another important economic concept is the balance of payments (BOP). The BOP is a record of all transactions between residents of one country and residents of all other countries over a given period of time. The BOP includes the current account, which records imports and exports of goods and services, and the capital account, which records financial transactions such as investment flows. A country with a deficit in its current account may experience a depreciation of its currency if it is unable to attract enough capital inflows to finance the deficit.Central banks also play a role in determining exchange rates through their monetary policy decisions. For example, a central bank may choose to lower interest rates to stimulate domestic demand, which can lead to a depreciation of the currency as investors seek higher returns in other countries. Conversely, a central bank may raise interest rates to combat inflation, which can lead to an appreciation of the currency as investors seek to invest in the country with higher returns.LEADING ECONOMIC INDICATORS *  Average weekly hours worked *  Average weekly jobless claims *  Changes in consumer sentiment *  Changes in the money supply *  Housing starts *  Orders for durable goods *  Performance of the S&P 500 LAGGING ECONOMIC INDICATORS *  Average duration of unemployment *  Changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) *  Changes in the labor cost per unit of output *  Prime rate charged by banks *  Value of outstanding commercial and industrial loans 