C.21A. Identify activities of daily living that can trigger the need for long term careActivities of daily living (ADLs) are basic self-care tasks that individuals must perform every day to maintain their independence and quality of life. Some ADLs that can trigger the need for long term care include:1. Bathing: The ability to wash oneself, including the ability to get into and out of a bathtub or shower.2. Dressing: The ability to put on and take off clothing, including any necessary braces or prostheses.3. Feeding: The ability to feed oneself, including the ability to use utensils, chew, and swallow.4. Toileting: The ability to use the toilet, including getting on and off the toilet and cleaning oneself afterwards.5. Transferring: The ability to move oneself from a bed to a chair or wheelchair, or to get up from a seated position.6. Continence: The ability to control bladder and bowel function.If an individual is unable to perform these tasks on their own, these tasks on their own, they may require assistance with ADL’s from a caregiver. Long term care insurance can help cover these costs, whether at home or an assisted care facility depending on the policy terms. There are several factors that can affect the cost of long term care insurance, including:1. Age: The younger you are when you purchase a policy, the lower your premiums will likely be.2. Health: Insurance companies will consider your current health status and any pre-existing medical conditions when determining your premiums.3. Benefit Period: The length of time that your policy will cover your long-term care needs will affect the cost of your policy. Generally, the longer the benefit period, the higher the premiums.4. Daily Benefit Amount: The amount of money that your policy will pay out per day for long-term care services will also affect the cost of your policy. These benefits can be paid out to cover for home care, or for assisted living facilities. Some long term care companies or policies require annual receipts and doctor certifications of the disabilities. 5. Elimination Period: This is the waiting period before your policy starts paying out benefits. The longer the elimination period, the lower your premiums will be.6. Inflation Protection: Adding inflation protection to your policy can increase the cost, but will help ensure that your benefits keep pace with rising costs over time. Refer to disability inflation rider info on more information on inflation protection. 7. Gender: Women tend to live longer than men and are more likely to need long-term care, so their premiums may be higher.Some insurance companies offer combination policies that include both long term care insurance and permanent life insurance. These policies are sometimes referred to as "hybrid" or "combo" policies.With a hybrid policy, you pay a single premium that covers both types of insurance. If you need long term care, the policy will provide benefits to cover the costs of your care. If you do not use the long term care benefits, the policy will pay out a death benefit to your beneficiaries when you pass away.One advantage of a hybrid policy is that you don't have to pay for long term care insurance if you don't end up needing it. However, these policies can be more expensive than standalone long term care insurance policies or standalone life insurance policies.It's important to carefully consider the costs and benefits of different types of policies before making a decision. 