C.19 A. Group and Individual Health Insurance alternatives-fee for service and managed care plansHealth insurance is an important decision. If you retire before age 65, you will need health insurance until Medicare begins.With various options depending on your individual circumstances, choosing health insurance can often be an overwhelming process. Here's how to choose the right plan for you and your family:1. SELECT YOUR PLAN HMO (Health Maintenance Organization) plans are the least expensive. They offer a lower monthly premium and less out-of-pocket expenses for medical services. A designated primary care physician (PCP) serves as the “gatekeeper” and determines when you may see specialists. Thus, the downside is that HMO plans are the most restrictive, and many people opt for these without knowing the hidden costs or necessity of a “gatekeeper” PCP to refer to a specialist. This can result in out of network charges at times. PPO (Preferred Provider Organization) plans charge a bit higher in exchange for more flexibility in choosing your providers. You do not need a referral to see any specialist and may use out-of-network physicians. However, you will have higher expenses with an out of network provider, and you may have to file a separate insurance claim.  Point of Service (POS) plans provide benefits of both the HMO and PPO plans. You choose what service, either HMO or PPO, to use each time you see a doctor. When you see an in-network primary care physician (PCP), you have no deductibles and preventive care is included, and he or she can refer you to a specialist. You also have the option of seeing an out-of-network provider, but with higher costs. If you like to manage your plan on a case-by-case basis and are willing to follow strict guidelines, you may find the POS plan attractive.These plans may fall under what is called a High Deductible Health Plan(HDHP). If your plan falls under these, you can qualify for an HSA account in which you can open for health savings with pre-tax funds or tax deductible funds. Further, with these funds you can roll them over year after year, which can be invested and become a very tax efficient retirement account for almost certain health expenses in retirement, or as a built up emergency health savings fund. If the plan doesn’t fall under the definition of a HDHP, you can still open an Flexible Spending Account(FSA) which allows you to have an account you can contribute to with pre-tax funds. This allows you to save and also be more tax efficient with your health expenses. However with an FSA, you must use your savings by March of following year. 2. TO DETERMINE WHICH PLAN BEST FITS YOUR FINANCIAL SITUATION, CONSIDER HOW THE FOLLOWING EXPENSES:* Co-payments may be required each time you visit a provider.* Co-insurance payments refer to the amount that the insured must pay for certain services, e.g., 20% of a hospital visit.* Deductibles require you to pay a certain amount before the coverage kicks in.* Policies have out-of-pocket limits, and these can vary greatly. The least expensive plans will have the highest limits, so don’t be fooled by the lower premiums. You could end up paying a large medical bill.3. REVIEW THE ACCESSIBILITY OF YOUR PREFERRED DOCTORS.Ideally, your preferred providers participate within your plan, especially your primary physician. If you see specialists on a regular basis, make sure that those within the selected plan are conveniently located. 4. PLAN STRUCTURES MAY DIFFER.Some plans may have primary, secondary and out-of-network tiers. Use providers within the primary tier as that will be the most cost effective. This is also usually seen within pharmacy costs. 5. UTILIZE TAX-ADVANTAGED MEDICAL SPENDING ACCOUNTS IF AVAILABLE.There are three main types of medical spending accounts: a Health Reimbursement Account (HRA), a Flex Spending Account (FSA) and a Health Savings Account (HSA).A Health Reimbursement Account (HRA) is an employer-funded health spending account. Some plans may include an HRA to help cover the employee’s out-of-pocket expenses on a tax-free basis.Many benefit plans offer the option of a Flex Spending Account (FSA)—an option to review when selecting your annual benefits. For 2023, you can fund up to $3,050 per family with pre-tax dollars to pay out-of-pocket expenses that must be exhausted by March of the following year. Over time, this results in significant tax savings.Lastly, if you have a High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP), you can fund a Health Savings Account (HSA) up to $3,850 ($7,300 for family) in 2023. Those who are age 55 or older may contribute an additional $1,000 per year. You can also make a one-time IRA rollover to your Health Savings Account up to the contribution limits. All contributions reduce your taxable income.If you retire before age 65, you can still fund a Health Savings Account. For example, you can fund an HSA from your pension, which will reduce your taxable income. However, unlike the FSA, you do not to have to deplete the Health Savings Account each year, so you continue to enjoy tax-deferred growth of your investments. But, be sure to discontinue contributions six months prior to enrolling in Medicare. Otherwise, you may incur a penalty.What’s new in 2023 in health savings accounts and health plans? What’s New Telehealth and other remote care services. Public Law 117-328, December 29, 2022, amended section 223 to provide that an High Deductible Health Plan (HDHP) may have a $0 deductible for telehealth and other remote care services for plan years beginning before 2022; months beginning after March 2022 and before 2023; and plan years beginning after 2022 and before 2025. Also, an “eligible individual” remains eligible to make contributions to its HSA even if the individual has coverage outside of the HDHP during these periods for telehealth and other remote care services. Health FSA contribution and carryover for 2023. Revenue Procedure 2022-38, October 18, 2022, provides that for tax years beginning in 2023, the dollar limitation under section 125(i) on voluntary employee salary reductions for contributions to health flexible spending arrangements is $3,050. If the cafeteria plan permits the carryover of unused amounts, the maximum carryover amount is $610. Insulin products. Public Law 117-169, August 16, 2022, amended section 223 to provide that an HDHP may have a $0 deductible for selected insulin products. The amendment applies to plan years beginning after 2022. Health FSA contribution and carryover for 2022. Revenue Procedure 2021-45, November 10, 2021, provides that for tax years beginning in 2022, the dollar limitation under section 125(i) on voluntary employee salary reductions for contributions to health flexible spending arrangements is $2,850. If the cafeteria plan permits the carryover of unused amounts, the maximum carryover amount is $570.Home testing for COVID-19 and personal protective equipment for preventing spread of COVID-19. News Release IR-2021-181, September 10, 2021, reminds that the cost of home testing for COVID-19 and the costs of personal protective equipment, such as masks, hand sanitizer and sanitizing wipes, for the primary purpose of preventing the spread of COVID-19 are eligible medical expenses that can be paid or reimbursed under health FSAs, HSAs, HRAs, or Archer MSAs. Surprise billing for emergency services or air ambulance services. Public Law 116-260, December 27, 2020, amended section 223 to provide that an HDHP may provide benefits under federal and state anti-“surprise billing” laws with a $0 deductible. Also, an “eligible individual” remains eligible to make contributions to its HSA even if the individual receives anti-“surprise billing” benefits outside of the HDHP. The amendment applies to plan years beginning after 2021. Note. Anti-“surprise billing” laws generally protect individuals from “surprise billing” for items like emergency medical services, some non-emergency medical services, and air ambulance services. Ask your insurance provider whether your HDHP and any other coverage meet the requirements of section 223. Ask your HSA trustee whether the HSA and trustee meet the requirements of section 223.HSA Miscellaneous InfoNo permission or authorization from the IRS is necessary to establish an HSA. You set up an HSA with a trustee. A qualified HSA trustee can be a bank, an insurance company, or anyone already approved by the IRS to be a trustee of individual retirement arrangements (IRAs) or Archer MSAs. The HSA can be established through a trustee that is different from your health plan provider. Your employer may already have some information on HSA trustees in your area.What are the benefits of an HSA? You may enjoy several benefits from having an HSA. • You can claim a tax deduction for contributions you, or someone other than your employer, make to your HSA even if you don’t itemize your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). • Contributions to your HSA made by your employer (including contributions made through a cafeteria plan) may be excluded from your gross income. • The contributions remain in your account until you use them. • The interest or other earnings on the assets in the account are tax free. • Distributions may be tax free if you pay qualified medical expenses. See Qualified medical expenses, later. * An HSA is “portable.” It stays with you if you change employers or leave the work force. Qualifying for an HSA Contribution To be an eligible individual and qualify for an HSA contribution, you must meet the following requirements. * You are covered under a high deductible health plan (HDHP), described later, on the first day of the month. * You have no other health coverage except what is permitted under Other health coverage, later.* You aren’t enrolled in Medicare. • You can’t be claimed as a dependent on someone else’s 2022 tax returnUnder the last-month rule, you are considered to be an eligible individual for the entire year if you are an eligible individual on the first day of the last month of your tax year (December 1 for most taxpayers). If you meet these requirements, you are an eligible individual even if your spouse has non-HDHP family coverage, provided your spouse’s coverage doesn’t cover you. Also, you may be an eligible individual even if you receive hospital care or medical services under any law administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for a service-connected disability. HSA Examples: 	Last-month rule. Under the last-month rule, if you are an eligible individual on the first day of the last month of your tax year (December 1 for most taxpayers), you are considered an eligible individual for the entire year. You are treated as having the same HDHP coverage for the entire year as you had on the first day of the last month if you didn’t otherwise have coverage.Example 1. You, age 53, become an eligible individual on December 1, 2022. You have family HDHP coverage on that date. Under the last-month rule, you contribute $7,300 to your HSA. You fail to be an eligible individual in June 2023. Because you didn’t remain an eligible individual during the testing period (December 1, 2022, through December 31, 2023), you must include in your 2023 income the contributions made in 2022 that wouldn’t have been made except for the last-month rule. You use the worksheet in the Form 8889 instructions to determine this amount. You would include $6,691.67 ($7,300.00 ? $608.33) in your gross income on your 2023 tax return. Also, a 10% additional tax applies to this amount.Example 2. You, age 39, have self-only HDHP coverage on January 1, 2022. You change to family HDHP coverage on November 1, 2022. Because you have family HDHP coverage on December 1, 2022, you contribute $7,300 for 2022. You fail to be an eligible individual in March 2023. Because you didn’t remain an eligible individual during the testing period (December 1, 2022, through December 31, 2023), you must include in income the contribution made that wouldn’t have been made except for the last-month rule. You use the worksheet in the Form 8889 instructions to determine this amount. January ................ $3,650.00 February ................ $3,650.00 March .................. $3,650.00 April ................... $3,650.00 May ................... $3,650.00 June .................. $3,650.00 July ................... $3,650.00 August ................. $3,650.00 September .............. $3,650.00 October ................ $3,650.00 November ............... $7,300.00 December ............... $7,300.00 Total for all months ........ $51,100.00 Limitation. Divide the total by 12 $4,258.33 You would include $3,041.67 ($7,300.00 ? $4,258.33) in your gross income on your 2023 tax return. Also, a 10% additional tax applies to this amount.The key with being eligible to do an HSA contribution is passing the 1 year testing period. So if you contribute or max out your HSA, you must remain HSA eligible for the next year. 