G. 57A. Identify the gift tax consequences of lifetime transfers to individuals and charities and recommend when filing a gift tax return is necessary. When an individual makes a gift of money or property to another person or a qualified charity, it may trigger gift tax consequences. The gift giver may be required to file a gift tax return with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) if the value of the gift exceeds the annual exclusion amount or the lifetime exclusion amount. The gift amount for 2023 is $17,000. The annual exclusion amount is the maximum amount of money or property that an individual can gift to another person without triggering gift tax consequences. As of 2023, the annual exclusion amount is $17,000 per recipient. This means that an individual can give up to $17,000 to as many people as they wish without having to file a gift tax return.If the value of the gift exceeds the annual exclusion amount, the excess amount is applied towards the lifetime exclusion amount. The lifetime exclusion amount is the total amount of money or property that an individual can gift over their lifetime without incurring gift tax. As of 2023, the lifetime exclusion amount is $12.06 million.If an individual makes a gift that exceeds the annual exclusion amount and reduces their lifetime exclusion amount, they may need to file a gift tax return with the IRS. The gift tax return is due on April 15th of the year following the gift.An individual may need to file a gift tax return if they make a gift that exceeds the annual exclusion amount or reduces their lifetime exclusion amount. The lifetime exclusion amount is adjusted annually for inflation, and as of 2023, it is $12.92 million.The lifetime exclusion amount is calculated by adding up the total value of all gifts an individual has made during their lifetime that exceed the annual exclusion amount. For example, if an individual makes a gift of $20,000 to their child in a given year, the excess amount of $3,000 would be applied towards the lifetime exclusion amount.The lifetime exclusion amount is used to determine the estate tax exemption. The estate tax is a tax on the transfer of property after an individual’s death. The estate tax exemption is also $12.92 million as of 2023. This means that an individual can transfer up to $12.92 million of property to their heirs without incurring estate tax.If an individual uses some or all of their lifetime exclusion amount for gift tax purposes, it will reduce the amount of estate tax exemption available at their death. For example, if an individual uses $2 million of their lifetime exclusion amount for gift tax purposes, they would only have $10.92 million of estate tax exemption available at their death.