G.59B. Basic components of charitable and non-charitable trusts including parties to a trust and operating terms of a trustCharitable and non-charitable trusts have different purposes and requirements, but they share some basic components. Here are the key components of both types of trusts:Charitable Trusts:1. Parties to the Trust: A charitable trust has three parties: the settlor or grantor, who creates the trust and funds it with assets; the trustee, who manages the trust assets and distributes income or principal to the charitable beneficiaries; and the charitable beneficiaries, who receive the benefits of the trust.2. Purpose: The purpose of a charitable trust is to benefit one or more charitable organizations or causes.3. Operating Terms: The operating terms of a charitable trust specify how the trust assets are to be managed and distributed to the charitable beneficiaries. These terms may include restrictions on the use of the trust assets, requirements for making distributions, and provisions for appointing new trustees or modifying the trust.Non-charitable Trusts:1. Parties to the Trust: A non-charitable trust has three parties: the settlor or grantor, who creates the trust and funds it with assets; the trustee, who manages the trust assets and distributes income or principal to the non-charitable beneficiaries; and the non-charitable beneficiaries, who receive the benefits of the trust.2. Purpose: The purpose of a non-charitable trust is to benefit one or more non-charitable beneficiaries, such as family members or friends.3. Operating Terms: The operating terms of a non-charitable trust specify how the trust assets are to be managed and distributed to the non-charitable beneficiaries. These terms may include restrictions on the use of the trust assets, requirements for making distributions, and provisions for appointing new trustees or modifying the trust.Both charitable and non-charitable trusts have three parties: the settlor or grantor, the trustee, and the beneficiaries. The purpose and operating terms of the trusts differ, with charitable trusts benefiting charitable organizations or causes, and non-charitable trusts benefiting non-charitable beneficiaries. The operating terms of the trusts specify how the trust assets are to be managed and distributed, and may include restrictions, requirements, and provisions for modification.