G.60B. Explain the Relationship between the marital deduction and qualified interest trustA marital deduction and a qualified terminable interest property (QTIP) trust are related concepts, as the QTIP trust is a type of trust that can be used to take advantage of the marital deduction.The main advantage of the QTIP is that it allows the decedent to have postmortem control over the property when the surviving spouse dies. The property can qualify for the marital deduction in the estate of the descendent and must be included as an asset in the gross estate of the surviving spouse.  A QTIP pays lifetime income interest for the spouse, makes annual payments to the spouse, the payments are mandatory and exclusive to the spouse. The marital deduction is a federal estate tax deduction that allows an individual to transfer an unlimited amount of assets to their spouse tax-free. However, if the surviving spouse were to die and leave those assets to someone else, those assets would be subject to estate taxes at that time. This is where the QTIP trust comes in.A QTIP trust is a type of trust that is designed to hold assets for the benefit of the surviving spouse, while also meeting certain requirements under U.S. tax law. The key benefit of a QTIP trust is that it allows the grantor to take advantage of the marital deduction while also ensuring that the assets are ultimately distributed according to their wishes post mortem. Under a QTIP trust, the surviving spouse is entitled to receive income from the trust for their lifetime, and the principal of the trust is preserved for distribution to other beneficiaries after the surviving spouse's death. This can be useful for individuals who want to provide for their surviving spouse financially while also ensuring that their assets are ultimately distributed according to their wishes.Under the TCJA of 2017, the executor of a deceased spouse’s estate can transfer any unused exemption to the surviving spouse. This unused exemption is frozen, and will not be adjusted for inflation. 