G.62A. When an executor selecting value of estate assets using alternative valuation dateAn executor may elect to value estate assets using the alternative valuation date if the value of the assets has declined significantly after the decedent's death. The alternative valuation date is an election that allows the executor to value the assets of the estate six months after the date of death, rather than the date of death itself.Alternate valuation is done by the executor, and it is an irrevocable decision and made within 6 months. Per tax code 26 CFR § 20.2023.1b(3) Requests for extension of time to make the election. A request for an extension of time to make the election or protective election pursuant to §§ 301.9100-1 and 301.9100-3 of this chapter will not be granted unless the return of tax imposed by section 2001 is filed no later than 1 year after the due date of the return (including extensions of time actually granted). Most alternate valuations however are done within 6 months. Example:For example, let's say that John is single and passed away on January 1, 2023, and his estate was valued at $14 million on that date. However, due to market volatility or other factors, the value of the assets in John's estate declined significantly over the next six months. By July 1, 2023, the estate's assets are only worth $9 million.In this scenario, the executor may elect to use the alternative valuation date of July 1, 2023, to value the estate's assets. By doing so, the estate will be valued at $9 million, rather than the higher value of $14 million on the date of death. This can result in a lower or no estate tax liability and may be beneficial for the beneficiaries of the estate.It is important to note that the alternative valuation date is not always beneficial, as it can also result in a higher estate tax liability if the value of the assets has increased over the six-month period. Additionally, the alternative valuation date is not available for all estates, and certain requirements must be met in order to elect to use this date. Some examples of included and excluded property:(d) “Included property” and “excluded property”. If the executor elects the alternate valuation method under section 2432, all property interests existing at the date of decedent's death which form a part of his gross estate as determined under sections 2033 through 2044 are valued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such property interests are referred to in this section as “included property”. Furthermore, such property interests remain “included property” for the purpose of valuing the gross estate under the alternate valuation method even though they change in form during the alternate valuation period by being actually received, or disposed of, in whole or in part, by the estate. On the other hand, property earned or accrued (whether received or not) after the date of the decedent's death and during the alternate valuation period with respect to any property interest existing at the date of the decedent's death, which does not represent a form of “included property” itself or the receipt of “included property” is excluded in valuing the gross estate under the alternate valuation method. Such property is referred to in this section as “excluded property”. Illustrations of “included property” and “excluded property” are contained in the subparagraphs (1) to (4) of this paragraph:(1) Interest-bearing obligations. Interest-bearing obligations, such as bonds or notes, may comprise two elements of “included property” at the date of the decedent's death, namely, (i) the principal of the obligation itself, and (ii) interest accrued to the date of death. Each of these elements is to be separately valued as of the applicable valuation date. Interest accrued after the date of death and before the subsequent valuation date constitutes “excluded property”. However, any part payment or principal made between the date of death and the subsequent valuation date, or any advance payment of interest for a period after the subsequent valuation date made during the alternate valuation period which has the effect of reducing the value of the principal obligation as of the subsequent valuation date, will be included in the gross estate, and valued as of the date of such payment.(2) Leased property. The principles set forth in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph with respect to interest- bearing obligations also apply to leased realty or personality which is included in the gross estate and with respect to which an obligation to pay rent has been reserved. Both the realty or personality itself and the rents accrued to the date of death constitute “included property”, and each is to be separately valued as of the applicable valuation date. Any rent accrued after the date of death and before the subsequent valuation date is “excluded property”. Similarly, the principle applicable with respect to interest paid in advance is equally applicable with respect to advance payments of rent.(3) Noninterest-bearing obligations. In the case of noninterest-bearing obligations sold at a discount, such as savings bonds, the principal obligation and the discount amortized to the date of death are property interests existing at the date of death and constitute “included property”. The obligation itself is to be valued at the subsequent valuation date without regard to any further increase in value due to amortized discount. The additional discount amortized after death and during the alternate valuation period is the equivalent of interest accruing during that period and is, therefore, not to be included in the gross estate under the alternate valuation method.(4) Stock of a corporation. Shares of stock in a corporation and dividends declared to stockholders of record on or before the date of the decedent's death and not collected at the date of death constitute “included property” of the estate. On the other hand, ordinary dividends out of earnings and profits (whether in cash, shares of the corporation, or other property) declared to stockholders of record after the date of the decedent's death are “excluded property” and are not to be valued under the alternate valuation method. If, however, dividends are declared to stockholders of record after the date of the decedent's death with the effect that the shares of stock at the subsequent valuation date do not reasonably represent the same “included property” of the gross estate as existed at the date of the decedent's death, the dividends are “included property”, except to the extent that they are out of earnings of the corporation after the date of the decedent's death. For example, if a corporation makes a distribution in partial liquidation to stockholders of record during the alternate valuation period which is not accompanied by a surrender of a stock certificate for cancellation, the amount of the distribution received on stock included in the gross estate is itself “included property”, except to the extent that the distribution was out of earnings and profits since the date of the decedent's death. Similarly, if a corporation, in which the decedent owned a substantial interest and which possessed at the date of the decedent's death accumulated earnings and profits equal to its paid-in capital, distributed all of its accumulated earnings and profits as a cash dividend to shareholders of record during the alternate valuation period, the amount of the dividends received on stock includible in the gross estate will be included in the gross estate under the alternate valuation method. Likewise, a stock dividend distributed under such circumstances is “included property”.As such, ExampleA parent bought TeW Tech 10 years ago when stock prices were $15 per share. At their death, the stock was worth $40. The executor in this case the oldest child, used the Alternate Valuation Date, and six months later, due to market movements, TeW Tech is worth $33.The second oldest child, Bradley will inherit the stock and receive a step-up in the cost basis of it to $33. $33 is the alternate value declared by the estate. Now, let’s assume that Bradley sells the stock within a year at $41. If the estate had used the value on the date of death ($40), Bradley might not have owed as much capital gains, and he would have been selling the stock at a higher price as the new cost basis. But since he received the stock with the lower cost basis ($33 or the Alternate Valuation Date price), capital gains tax on the $8 gain is due. So the estate can save money by using alternative valuation date, and this is particularly helpful when estate tax is owed, as estate tax is higher than capital gains tax. For more complex examples, it is best to seek out the advice of a qualified estate attorney, accountant, and potentially a qualified financial planner to assist you in the valuations of your estate and filing the Form 706. 