G.62B. Rules that must be followed in order to use a qualified disclaimer estate planning strategyA qualified disclaimer is an estate planning strategy that allows a beneficiary to refuse all or part of an inheritance, which is then passed on to another beneficiary without incurring gift or estate tax liabilities. In order for the disclaimer to be considered qualified, it must meet certain rules and requirements, including the following:1. The disclaimer must be in writing: The disclaimer must be in writing and signed by the beneficiary making the disclaimer. The writing must also identify the property being disclaimed and the person to whom the property will pass2. The disclaimer must be made within 9 months of the decedent's death: The disclaimer must be made within 9 months of the decedent's death, or within 9 months of the beneficiary's 21st birthday if they are a minor.3. The beneficiary must not have accepted any benefits from the property: The beneficiary making the disclaimer must not have accepted any benefits from the property, such as income or use of the property.4. The disclaimer must be irrevocable: Once the disclaimer is made, it is irrevocable and cannot be undone.5. The disclaimer must pass to a qualified recipient: The property being disclaimed must pass to a qualified recipient, such as another beneficiary or the decedent's estate. The recipient must be identified in the writing of the disclaimer.6. The disclaimer must not violate other laws or agreements: The disclaimer must not violate any other laws or agreements, such as a prenuptial agreement or a court order.By meeting these rules and requirements, the beneficiary making the disclaimer can avoid gift or estate tax liabilities and pass the inheritance on to a qualified recipient. When a beneficiary files a qualified disclaimer, they are essentially giving up their right to the disclaimed property, which then passes to another beneficiary or the decedent's estate. If the disclaimed property passes back to the estate, and the value of the disclaimed property will be included in the estate for estate tax purposes.It is important to note that the qualified disclaimer must meet certain rules and requirements in order to be considered qualified, including the requirement that the disclaimed property passes to a qualified recipient. If the disclaimed property passes back to the estate or to a non-qualified recipient, the disclaimer may not be considered qualified, and the estate or recipient may be subject to estate or gift tax liabilities.Example:On July 1, 2005, Brad opens a bank account that is held jointly with Jennifer, Brad's spouse, and transfers $50,000 of Brad's money to the account. Brad and Jennifer are United States citizens. Brad can regain the entire account without Jennifer's consent, such that the transfer is not a completed gift under § 25.2511-1(h)(4). Brad dies on August 15, 2013, and Jennifer disclaims the entire amount in the bank account on October 15, 2013. Assuming that the remaining requirements of section 2518(b) are satisfied, Jennifer made a qualified disclaimer under section 2518(a) because the disclaimer was made within 9 months after Brad's death at which time Jennifer had succeeded to full dominion and control over the account. Under state law, Jennifer is treated as predeceasing Brad with respect to the disclaimed interest. The disclaimed account balance passes through Brad's probate estate and is no longer joint property includible in Brad's gross estate under section 2040. The entire account is, instead, includible in Brad's gross estate under section 2033. The result would be the same if Brad and Jennifer were not married.If instead Jennifer disclaims 40 percent of the funds in the account the scenario is different. Since, under state law, Jennifer is treated as predeceasing Brad with respect to the disclaimed interest, the 40 percent portion of the account balance that was disclaimed passes as part of Brad's probate estate, and is no longer characterized as joint property. This 40 percent portion of the account balance is, therefore, includible in Brad's gross estate under section 2033. The remaining 60 percent of the account balance that was not disclaimed retains its character as joint property and, therefore, is includible in Brad's gross estate as provided in section 2040(b). Therefore, 30 percent ( 1/2 ? 60 percent) of the account balance is includible in Brad's gross estate under section 2040(b), and a total of 70 percent of the aggregate account balance is includible in Brad's gross estate. If Brad and Jennifer were not married, then the 40 percent portion of the account subject to the disclaimer would be includible in Brad's gross estate as provided in section 2033 and the 60 percent portion of the account not subject to the disclaimer would be includible in Brad's gross estate as provided in section 2040(a), because Brad furnished all of the funds with respect to the account.