G. 64C. Strategies to protect existing assets from offsetThere are several strategies that a financial planner might use to protect existing assets from government offset. Here are some examples:1. Special Needs Trusts (most common): A special needs trust is a type of trust that is designed to hold and manage assets for the benefit of an individual with disabilities. These trusts can be used to protect assets from government offset, as the assets held in the trust are not considered to be owned by the individual with disabilities for purposes of Medicaid and SSI eligibility. There are two mainly used types, “Self-settled” Special Needs Trusts, and “Third-Party” Special Needs Trust that is established by someone other and the person with the disability. 2. ABLE Accounts: ABLE accounts are tax-advantaged savings accounts that are designed to help individuals with disabilities and their families save for disability-related expenses. ABLE accounts are exempt from Medicaid and SSI asset tests, and can be used to protect assets from government offset.3. Gifting: Gifting assets to family members or other loved ones can be a way to protect assets from government offset. However, it is important to be aware of the gift tax rules and to work with a financial planner or attorney to develop a gifting strategy that is appropriate for your specific situation. Such gifts can offset their SSI amounts. 4. Structured Settlements: Structured settlements are financial arrangements that provide regular payments to an individual over a period of time. These settlements can be used to protect assets from government offset, as the payments received are not considered to be assets for purposes of Medicaid and SSI eligibility.5. Retirement Accounts: Retirement accounts, such as IRAs and 401(k)s, are generally exempt from government offset. Contributing to a retirement account can be a way to protect assets from government offset while also saving for retirement.Special Needs TrustThe essential purpose of a special needs trust is usually to improve the quality of an individual’s life without disqualifying him or her from eligibility for public benefits. Therefore, one of the central duties of the trustee of a special needs trust is to understand what public benefits programs might be available to the beneficiary and how receipt of income, or provision of food or shelter, might affect eligibility. Because there are numerous programs, competing (and sometimes even conflicting) eligibility rules, and at least two different types of special needs trusts to contend with, the entire area is fraught with opportunities to make mistakes. Because the stakes are often so high—the public benefits programs may well be providing all the necessities of life to the beneficiary—a good understanding of the rules and programs is critically important.However, there is a lookback period for gifting and special needs trusts with regards to government offset programs such as Medicaid and SSI.For gifting, the lookback period is 5 years for Medicaid. This means that any gifts made within the 5 years prior to applying for Medicaid or SSI benefits will be subject to penalties and could result in a period of ineligibility for benefits. For New York and California it is 30 months. For special needs trusts, the rules are a bit more complex. There are two types of special needs trusts: third-party special needs trusts and first-party special needs trusts (also known as self-settled special needs trusts).Third-party special needs trusts are funded with assets that belong to someone other than the beneficiary, such as a parent or grandparent. These trusts are not subject to the same lookback rules as gifting or first-party special needs trusts.First-party special needs trusts, on the other hand, are funded with the beneficiary's own assets. These trusts are subject to a lookback period of 5 years, and any assets transferred into the trust during the lookback period will be subject to penalties and could result in a period of ineligibility for benefits.Another important topic is discerning the type of government program providing benefits. Some programs (like SSDI and Medicare) do not impose financial eligibility requirements; a beneficiary receiving income and all his or her medical care from those two programs might not need a special needs trust at all, or might benefit from more flexibility given to the trustee. A recipient of SSI and/or Medicaid, however, may need more restrictive language in the trust document and closer attention on the part of the trustee.Example of SSI qualifications:For 2022 the maximum federal SSI benefit for a single person is $841. One-third of that amount is $283.33, and so the maximum reduction in benefits caused by ISM (no matter how high the value) is $303.33 per month. The meaning of that confusing collection of information is best illustrated using an example (CAUTION: some states provide SSI supplemental payments that affect this calculation). Consider John, who is disabled as a result of his serious mental illness. He has no work history, and he does not qualify for SSDI. He is an adult, living on his own. He qualifies for the maximum federal SSI benefit of $841; he lives in a state which does not provide an SSI supplement. If John’s mother gives him $100 cash per month (for food and cigarettes), he is required to report that as countable unearned income each month. Although SSI may take two or three months to accomplish the adjustment, the program will eventually withhold $80 ($100 minus the $20 disregard) from his benefit for each month in which his mother makes a cash gift to him. The same result will obtain if John’s mother is trustee of a special needs trust for John and the cash comes from that trust. If, however, John’s mother does not give him the $100 directly, but instead purchases $70 worth of food and $30 worth of cigarettes each month, only the food will affect his SSI payment—reducing it by $50 ($70 minus the $20 disregard). If she purchases $20 worth of food and $80 worth of cigarettes, there will be no effect at all—the food purchase is within the $20 monthly disregard amount. Similarly, if she purchases $20 worth of cigarettes and $30 worth of movie tickets, there will be no effect—provided that the movie tickets cannot be turned in for cash (because if the movie tickets can be converted to cash, John could—even if he does not—convert the movie tickets into payment for food or shelter). In other words, the effect of John’s mother’s payments to him or for his benefit changes with the nature of her payments. Any cash she provides to him (over the $20 monthly amount ignored by SSI) reduces his SSI payment directly. Direct purchase of items other than food or shelter does not affect his SSI, so long as the purchased items cannot be converted to food or shelter. Finally, any payment she makes for food or shelter reduces his SSI check as well, but not as harshly as cash payments directly to John. Now suppose that John’s mother decides to give up on trying to work around the strictures of SSI rules, and she simply pays his rent at an adult care facility that provides his meals. Assume that the facility costs her $1500 per month, which she pays from her own pocket. Because of the ISM rules, John’s SSI benefit will be reduced by only $303.33 per month, and so his SSI check will be $540.67. Critically important, however, John will still qualify for Medicaid benefits in most states because he receives some amount of SSI. If the adult care home payment comes from a special needs trust for John’s benefit, the same result will occur, assuming that the room and board portion of the payment exceeds $303.33. Incidentally, the same result will also obtain if John’s mother simply takes him in and allows him to live and eat with her without charging him rent. Now assume that John does have a work history before becoming disabled, and that he qualifies to receive $600 per month from SSDI. Because he has been receiving SSDI for more than two years, he also qualifies for Medicare. Because his countable income is less than $841, he continues to receive $261 in SSI benefits ($20 of the SSD is disregarded), and qualifies for Medicaid as well (we will ignore the effect of the QMB and SLMB programs for qualified, special lowincome Medicare beneficiaries, and the Medicare Part B premium which would ordinarily be withheld from his SSDI check). Now if John’s mother pays his rent at the adult care home, or takes him into her own home, he will lose his SSI altogether—since he is receiving less than $303.33 per month from SSI, the effect of the ISM rules will be to knock him off the program. Unless he separately qualifies for Medicaid, he will also lose his coverage under that program. The income strictures are the same or similar for other programs, with one important exception. In some states, but not all, eligibility for community or long-term care Medicaid is also dependent on countable income. The income tests vary. In some, you can “spend down” excess income over the limit to become eligible. In others, if countable income exceeds the benefit “cap” (like SSI), you cannot become eligible at all. Some states also attempt to limit expenditures from selfsettled (and even third-party) special needs trusts, and can require amendments to the language of those trusts in order to allow eligibility. While a good argument can be made that the Medicaid program does not have that ability, as a practical matter, the trustee of the special needs trust will have to either litigate that issue or acquiesce in the Medicaid agency’s demands.The limitation on assets for SSI eligibility may be somewhat easier to understand, or at least to describe. A single person must have no more than $2,000 in available resources in order to qualify for SSI. Some types of assets are not counted as available (called “non-countable”), including the beneficiary’s home, one automobile, household furnishings, prepaid burial amounts plus up to $1500 set aside for funeral expenses (or life insurance in that amount), tools of the beneficiary’s trade, and a handful of other, less important items. Each of these categories of assets is subject to special rules and exceptions, so it is easy to become tangled in the asset eligibility structure.DeemingThe SSI program considers portions of the income and assets of non-disabled, ineligible parents of minor disabled children and of an ineligible spouse living with the SSI recipient as available, and countable for eligibility purposes. This is called “deeming”. A certain portion of the ineligible person’s income and assets is considered as necessary for his or her own living expenses, and therefore is excluded. As soon as a child reaches age 18, parental deeming no longer occurs, even if the child continues to live in the household. If spouses voluntarily separate and live in different households, then deeming from the separate spouse or parent also ends. However, in both instances, if the separate person continues to provide support or maintenance to the SSI eligible individual, it will still count as income as described above unless a Court orders it to be deposited directly into the trust. There is also a limited exception to all parental deeming for a severely disabled minor child returning home from an institution or whose condition would otherwise qualify them for institutionalization, which is called a waiver.Expenditures from a special needs trust? In-kind purchases, meaning purchase of goods or services for the benefit of the beneficiary, only potentially affect the SSI benefit amount, and not Medicaid benefits, although the Medicaid agency may restrict expenditures for approved things. There are a number of specific purchases that frequently recur: Home, Upkeep and Utilities Keep in mind that SSI’s in-kind support and maintenance (ISM) rules deal specifically with payments for “food and shelter.” The Social Security Administration includes only these items as food and shelter: 1. Food 2. Mortgage (including property insurance required by the mortgage holder) 3. Real property taxes (less any tax rebate/credit) 4. Rent 5. Heating fuel 6. Gas 7. Electricity 8. Water 9. Sewer 10. Garbage removal The rules make special note of the fact that condominium assessments may in some cases be at least partial payments for water, sewer, garbage removal and the like. In other words, a payment for rent will implicate the ISM rules, as will monthly mortgage payments. The outright purchase of a home, whether in the name of the beneficiary or the trust, will not cause loss of SSI (although it may reduce the beneficiary’s SSI benefit for the single month in which the home is purchased). This brings up another consideration. Purchase of a home in the trust’s name will subject it to a Medicaid “payback” requirement on the death of the beneficiary, whereas purchase in the name of the beneficiary may allow other planning that will avoid the home becoming part of the payback. This complicated interplay of trust rules, ISM definition, estate-recovery rules, and home ownership continued from page 9 11 makes this area of special needs trust administration particularly fraught with difficulty. However, the Medicaid state agency’s treatment of distributions from special needs trusts may differ from the Social Security interpretation—especially when the beneficiary of a self-settled trust is eligible for Medicaid benefits. For example, contrary to putting the house in the individual’s name, a state may require that any purchase of a home by such a trust would result in title being held in the trust’s name, thereby ensuring that the state will at least receive the proceeds from the sale of the residence upon the death of the beneficiary.Other than those 10 utilities listed, there is no federal limitation on utility payments. In other words, the trust can pay for cable, telephone, highspeed internet connection, newspaper, and other “utilities” not on the list.Purchase of a vehicle and maintenance (including gas and insurance) is permitted under federal law. Note that there is a mechanical difficulty in providing gasoline without providing cash that could be converted to food or shelter. One technique which has worked well has been to arrange for the beneficiary to have a gas-company credit card. Because eligibility for such cards is easier to meet, and because the cards cannot be used to purchase groceries, administration of the credit account is easier to set up and monitor, and the card can then be billed directly to the trust. Some state Medicaid agencies put limitations on the value, type, and title ownership of vehicles, such as only allowing a vehicle valued at up to $5,000, handicapped-equipped, or requiring a lien in favor of the payback trust on the title. The SSI program does not specifically require or monitor such limitations.Tuition, Books, Tutoring No limit under either federal or state law. This is an excellent use of special needs trust funds. Travel and Entertainment There is no limit except that there may be some concern about payment for hotels. When the beneficiary still maintains a residence at home, the hotel stay and restaurant may be considered “shelter” and “food” expenses. Some states may impose limitations on companion travel not found in federal law. These might include not allowing recipients to have the special needs trust pay for more than one traveling companion, the companion must be necessary to provide care, and the companion may not be a person obligated to support the beneficiary such as a minor beneficiary’s parent. Note that foreign travel can have two other adverse effects: (1) airline tickets to foreign destinations, if refundable, will be treated as being convertible into food and shelter, and (2) if an SSI recipient is out of the country for more than a month, he or she may lose eligibility until return. For those reasons, foreign travel, unlike domestic travel, usually must be limited in time. Household Furnishings and Furniture The trust can be used to purchase appliances, furniture, fixtures and the like. Before March 2005, there was a theoretical concern in the SSI program that the value of household furnishings might exceed an arbitrary limit and affect the beneficiary’s eligibility; that value limit has now been removed. Television, Computers and Electronics There is no specific limitation on purchase of household televisions or other electronic devices, although under SSI rules the individual is only allowed to own “ordinary household goods” that are not kept for collectible value and are used on a regular basis. The trust can also provide a computer for the beneficiary, plus software and upgrades. Durable Medical Equipment There is no federal limitation on any medical related equipment, but individual states may limit purchase of some equipment as not being “necessary.” Problem areas could be if the equipment could also be considered as recreational, such as a heated swimming pool needed for arthritic or other joint conditions.Therapy, Medications, Alternative Treatments Same principle as durable medical equipment, so long as the state does not regulate the treatment, there is no federal limitation.Taxes No federal limitation, but states may attempt to direct trust language on what taxes can be paid for, such as taxes incurred as a result of trust assets or at the death of the beneficiary. Since it is difficult to imagine an SSI or Medicaid beneficiary having significant non-trust income, it is hard to see how this limitation is so much troublesome as it is quarrelsomeLegal, Guardianship and Trustee Fees At least some states allow legal, guardianship, and trustee fees to be paid from the trust, although some federal law indicates that payment of guardian’s fees or guardian’s attorney fees may really benefit the guardian and not the beneficiary. Payments for trust administration expenses, including the trust’s attorney’s fees, are clearly permissible under both federal and state law, and are rarely limited beyond reasonableness standards.Care Management No federal limitation, but many states attempt to limit payments for care or management if made to a family member or other relative, especially if there is an obligation of support (e.g., parents of minor children).Loans, Credit, Debit and Gift Cards Receipt of a “loan” will not count as income for the SSI or Medicaid programs, which means that a trust can make a loan of cash directly to a beneficiary. There are rules that must be followed for loans to be valid and non-countable. There must be an enforceable agreement at the time that the loan is made that the loan will be paid back at some point, which usually means that it should be in writing. The agreement to pay back cannot be based on a future contingency such as, “I only have to pay it back if I win the lottery...” Finally, the loan must be considered as “feasible,” meaning that there is a reasonable expectation that the beneficiary will have the means at some point to pay back the loan. If a loan is forgiven, then it would count as income at that time. Also, if the beneficiary still has the loaned amount in the following month, it will then count as a resource. However, school loans are not countable as income or as a resource so long as the funds are spent for tuition, room and board, and other education-related expenses within nine months of receipt. Since goods or services purchased with a credit card are actually a “loan” that must be paid back to the credit card company, they are also not considered as income to the beneficiary at time of purchase. As long as the beneficiary doesn’t sell the goods for cash, there is also the added advantage that the trust can pay back the credit card company without the payment counting as income, except for purchases that are considered as food or shelter. Food and shelter related purchases use the same ISM countable income rules (and particularly the countable income limits) described above. Use of a debit card by a beneficiary when purchases are made for payment through a trust-funded bank account is income to the beneficiary for the amount accessed. The total amount in the account available to be accessed could possibly be a countable resource. Is a gift card purchased by a trust and provided to a beneficiary considered to be a distribution of income, a line of credit to a vendor (similar to a credit card), or just access for in-kind purchase of goods or services on behalf of a beneficiary by the trust? SSI rules are not yet clear on this point, and it is probable that different Social Security and Medicaid offices will treat the use of debit and gift cards differently until precise guidelines are provided by the agencies. The safe approach is to use them in a very limited way; if they are to be used at all, keep receipts for all special needs items, and be prepared for adverse treatment.Trust Administration and Accounting Actual administration of a special needs trust is in most respects similar to administration of any other trust. A trustee has a general obligation to account to beneficiaries and other interested parties. Tax returns may need to be filed (though not always), and tax filing requirements will be based on the tax rules, not special needs trust rules. Some special needs trusts, but by no means all, will be subject to court supervision and control. Trustee’s Duties As with general trust law requirements, the trustee of a special needs trust has an obligation not to self-deal, not to delegate the trustee’s duties impermissibly, not to favor either income or remainder beneficiaries over one another, and to invest trust assets prudently. The obligations of a trustee continued from page 11 It is generally beneficial for a self-settled special needs trust to be a grantor trust. This is true because the tax rates for non-grantor trusts are tightly compressed, and the highest marginal tax rate on income is reached very quickly for trusts. 13 are well-discussed in several centuries of legal precedent, and cannot be taken lightly. Legal counsel (and professional investment, tax and accounting assistance) will be required in administration of almost every special needs trust.Trust rules bear special mention: NO SELF-DEALING As with other trusts, the trustee of a special needs trust is prohibited from self-dealing. That means no investment of trust assets in the trustee’s business or assets, no mingling of trust and personal assets, no borrowing from the trust, no purchase of goods or services (by the trust) from the trustee (other than, of course, trust administration services), and no sale of trust assets to the trustee. The same strictures also apply to the trustee’s immediate family members, and the existence of an appraisal, or the favorable terms of a transaction, do not change these rules. IMPARTIALITY Because the trust has both an “income” beneficiary (the person with disabilities) and a “remainder” beneficiary (the state, in the case of a Medicaid payback trust, or the individuals who will receive assets when the income beneficiary dies), the trustee has a necessarily divided loyalty. It is important to remain impartial as between the trust’s beneficiaries. Thus, investment in assets exclusively designed to maximize income at the expense of growth, or vice versa, may violate the trustee’s duty to the negatively affected class of beneficiaries. Note that a trust may, by its terms, make clear that the interests of one or the other class of beneficiaries should be paramount— though such language will probably earn the disapproval of the Medicaid agency in any self-settled trust which must be submitted to Medicaid for approval.DELEGATION Generally speaking, a trustee may delegate functions but may not avoid liability by doing so. In other words, while the trustee may hire investment advisers, tax preparers and the like, he or she will remain liable for any failures by such professionals. Some states do limit the trustee’s liability. For example, in states which have adopted the Uniform Prudent Investor Act, delegating investment authority pursuant to the Act will limit the trustee’s liability so that he or she will only be required to carefully select and monitor the investment adviser. INVESTMENT Any trustee should be familiar with the principles of Modern Portfolio Theory, with its emphasis on risk tolerance and asset diversification. A trustee who holds himself, herself, or itself out as having special expertise in investments or asset management will be held to a higher standard, but any trustee will be required to understand and implement prudent investment practices. Some courts will institute an investment policy that requires a percentage of assets to be held in fixed income investments and the remainder in securities (e.g., a 60/40 split is common).Bond A trustee, especially one who administers a special needs trust supervised by a probate court, may need to be bonded. Bond is a type of insurance arrangement whereby the trustee pays a premium in order to guarantee that the trustee manages the trust and carries out his or her fiduciary duties correctly. The bond premium is an acceptable expense of the trust, and need not come out of the trustee’s own pocket. If the trustee fails to exercise his or her fiduciary duty and the trust loses money as a result, the insurance company that issued the bond will compensate the trust and take action to collect from the trustee. The bond premium depends on multiple factors, including the credit history of the trustee and the value of the trust. Most corporate trustees are exempt from posting bond. Individual trustees must “post bond”; that is, provide written documentation to the probate court that the individual is bonded. The bond is typically issued for a set period of time, for example one year, and at the expiration of the time period, the trustee must pay an additional premium or show the bond issuer that bond is no longer required by the probate court. It is possible in most states, at least when the trust is supervised by a court, to ask the court for permission to deposit the assets in a restricted or “blocked” account with a financial institution rather than posting bond. While this circumvents the issue of being bonded, the financial institution should require a certified copy of the court’s order authorizing the expenditure of funds prior to making a distribution from the special needs trust. This can result in frequent in-person trips to the bank by the trustee, although it avoids the sometimes costly bond premium.Titling Assets The trust assets should not be titled in the beneficiary’s name except in limited circumstances, such as when it is advantageous to title the home in the individual’s name. Typically, the trust assets should be titled in the name of the trustee. For example, if James Jones is the trustee of the Lisa Martin Special Needs Trust, and that trust was signed on March 15, 2007, then the trust assets should be titled as follows: “James Jones, Trustee of the Lisa Martin Special Needs Trust u/a/d March 15, 2007” (“u/a/d” means “under agreement dated”). It is important that most assets not be held in James Jones’s or Lisa Martin’s name individually. If the assets are not titled properly, then the assets may be counted as a resource, or the interest earned counted as income, by the agencies that administer means-tested government benefits, which will frustrate the purpose of the special needs trust, as well as contribute to confusion during tax preparation. Additionally, as discussed in further detail below, it may also be important to request a separate Tax ID number for the trust as well as properly title the assets.Reporting to Medicaid If the beneficiary resides in a state where the receipt of SSI results in the beneficiary also being automatically enrolled in Medicaid, then no separate accounting requirement need be made to the Medicaid agency. However, if the individual is in a state where SSI and Medicaid are not interrelated, then it continued from page 13 The trustee of a special needs trust is prohibited from self-dealing. That means no investment of trust assets in the trustee’s business or assets, no mingling of trust and personal assets, no borrowing from the trust, no purchase of goods or services (by the trust) from the trustee (other than, of course, trust administration services), and no sale of trust assets to the trustee. 15 may be necessary to account to both agencies. The Medicaid consumer (or their guardian) is required to notify Medicaid of a change in resources or income within a set period of time, usually as short as ten days. This includes situations where the Medicaid consumer receives an inheritance or settlement and immediately transfers the funds to a special needs trust. The trustee of a third-party special needs trust may not have the same duty to account, but may choose to provide accounting information to Medicaid rather than risk later disqualification of the beneficiary, even though Medicaid’s power to consider trust expenditures may be subject to challenge.Trusts Special needs trusts, like other types of trusts, can complicate income tax preparation. The first question to be addressed is whether—for income tax purposes–the trust is a “grantor” trust or not. Tax rules defining “grantor” trusts are neither simple nor intuitive, but fortunately there are some easy rules of thumb to apply, and they will work for most special needs trusts. “Grantor” Trusts A “grantor” trust is treated for tax purposes as a transparent entity. In other words, the grantor of a “grantor” trust is treated as having received the income directly, even though the accounts are titled to the trust and all income shows up in the name of the trust. Generally speaking, a self-settled special needs trust will be a grantor trust if a family member is the trustee. If the trust names an independent trustee it may still be a grantor trust if one of several specific provisions exists in the trust. A qualified accountant or lawyer should be able to tell whether a given trust is a grantor trust at a glance. If it is, it remains a grantor trust for its entire life—or at least until the death of the grantor (when the trust may either terminate or convert into a non-grantor trust as to its new beneficiaries). Until the trust has been reviewed by an expert, assume that it is probably a grantor trust. It is generally beneficial for a self-settled special needs trust to be a grantor trust. This is true because the tax rates for non-grantor trusts are tightly compressed, and the highest marginal tax rate on income is reached very quickly for trusts. The practical difference will be small if the trust actually makes distributions for the benefit of the beneficiary in excess of its annual taxable income, but the proper tax reporting approach should still be followed. TAX ID NUMBERS A grantor trust may, but need not, obtain an Employer Identification Number (an EIN). Some attorneys and accountants choose to secure an EIN in each case, while others resist doing so—either approach is defensible. Although banks, brokerage houses and other financial institutions may insist that the trust requires its own EIN, they are simply wrong. There is widespread confusion about the necessity for an EIN for irrevocable trusts, but a confident and well-informed trustee, attorney or accountant should be able to convince the financial institution that no separate EIN is required. Instead, the trustee can simply provide the financial institution with the grantor’s Social Security number.FILING TAX RETURNS A grantor trust ordinarily will not file a separate tax return. If a grantor trust has been assigned an EIN, it may file an “informational” return. The return can include a paragraph indicating that the trust is a grantor trust, that all income is being reported on the beneficiary’s individual return, and that no substantive information will be included in the fiduciary income tax return. Actually, completing the fiduciary income tax return is not an option for a grantor trust, although again there is much confusion on this point, even among some professionals. Non-Grantor Trusts Virtually all third-party, and some self-settled, special needs trusts will be non-grantor trusts. Because income will not be treated as having been earned by the beneficiary, a fiduciary income tax return (IRS form 1041) will be required. TAX ID NUMBERS A non-grantor trust will need to obtain its own EIN by filing a federal form SS-4. Nearly all third-party special needs trusts will be “complex” trusts—this designation simply means that the trust is not required to distribute all its income to the income beneficiary each year. Although the trust will be listed as “complex” on the SS-4, it may in fact alternate between “complex” and “simple” on each year’s 1041.FILING TAX RETURNS The non-grantor trust must file a 1041 each year. All distributions for the benefit of the beneficiary are conclusively presumed to be of income first, so any trust expenditures in excess of deductions will result in a Form K-1 showing income imputed to the beneficiary. This should not cause particular concern, since Social Security (and even Medicaid) eligibility workers are increasingly likely to understand that “income” for tax purposes is different from “income” for public benefits eligibility purposes. Any tax liability incurred by the individual beneficiary as a result of this imputation can be paid by the trust, though the trustee may not have the authority to prepare and sign the individual’s tax return. Administrative and other deductible expenses on an individual tax return must reach 2% of the taxpayer’s income before being deducted at all. The same is not true of a trust tax return, leading to a modest benefit to treatment as a nongrantor trust in some cases. This benefit may not offset the compressed income tax rates levied against non-grantor trusts, but each case will be different. The difficulty in determining the proper—and the best—income tax treatment is made worse when one adds the confusing option of treatment as a “Qualified Disability Trust.”